ID	Text							
36FFXPMST94U8HLYY9BRY4KKCVPOHF	"*MEN looking to take your gf or soon to be gf or wife on a NICE CHEAP DATE? Maggiano's is the place to go ;)  MY ABSOLUTE FAVORITE ITALIAN RESTAURANT! I come here about at least twice a month and I've always enjoyed the atmosphere and their delicious food. Make sure you try their Caesar's salad because they honestly have the BEST Caesar's salad. Everything else I've had on their menu has been phenomenal.   At Maggiano's you're able to substitute or subtract/add items you don't like. They also serve bread so an appetizer isn't needed unless you want to order them.   On weekends, it's probably best if you make a reservation just in case cause they can make you wait 25-35 mins for just 2 people, but they do accept walk-ins as well if you're up for the wait or just in the area.   Average bill for 2 ppl with 2 orders of side Caesar's salad and 2 beverages, excluding alcohol...is roughly $40. That price for good food, fancy looking restaurant and is on the strip is hard to find!"	-1.4	you got it	-2	-1	0	1	2
3R15W654VD9ZFPH447ITF18R8DGLQR	"2 1/2 more like it.  They put lots of food on the plates, it's just that it's really nothing too special. The best of the lot we tried were the mussels, and the side spinach salad was okay as well.  As for the veal picata, or the crab cakes...would  pass on them.  Wines in the limited selection are reasonably priced.  Along with the large portions, prices are reasonable.. and that keeps the place packed with patrons... reservations are recommended."				-1.2	-0.4	0.4	1.2
3QTFNPMJC6YYHHLG3GHLJMOKIB1ZN1	"2 hour wait! OMG -_- The food is good, but not 2 hour good.  People, without reservations that came after us, were called before we were. We had a table of 6. We were so hungry by the time they called us that we ordered a bunch of appetizers- mussels, mozzarella sticks, and calamari. The complimentary bread was okay... not my favorite type of bread.   I thought I ordered pasta because I saw pictures on Yelp... but it wasn't on their menu. The shrimp & crab pasta on Yelp pictures are different than the menu's shrimp & crab cannelloni. It was actually good though- 3 crepes filled with cheese, crab, and shrimp. Everyone else ordered pasta carbonara and steak. Everyone liked their food so that was good. It was a great experience but the wait is killer."							
3CMV9YRYP3HIT2DR9HYKI0W5UINLJZ	"2 stars is generous after my last trip there which was on Thanksgiving. It was my 4th year in a row eating here on Thanksgiving. I booked a month out and was told the earliest available was 7:15pm. We were seated quickly but that's the only thing that went right. We ordered all parts of the 5 course family style holiday menu and half of what we ordered showed up. They ran out of food at an ""all you can eat"" meal. Instead of being upfront with us we got a dog and pony type of magic show ""disappearing food"". When I approached the manager he asked"" what do you want me to do about it?"" Are you kidding me? $35 per person and you do not have what we want? I am fairly certain I will never go back, that's coming from a Chicago guy who loves Italian food. Also their regular menu item portions have been cut in half and the price slashed a buck or two. Lame."							
3OB6JN3A9Q5JX8EPHY88K4XL448RM0	"2 stars, because I've definitely experienced better.   I booked a reservation through Open Table. I actually changed my reservation twice because my parents' plans kept changing. First I scheduled it at 7pm, then I changed it to 6pm, then finally to 6:45. I got a confirmation email for each change, so it was fine. In my reservation I specifically stated: We would greatly prefer a view seating as we are here to celebrate my mother's 63rd birthday. Did that happen? NOPE.  When we arrived at 6:45, I went up to the heavy set host/supervisor who didn't even care to greet me and told him I had a reservation that I made on Open Table for 6:45. He clicked around on his computer and said he didn't see and record of it. I proceeded to login to my Open Table account and pull up the whole reservation on my Ipod. I maximized the time, name, and party party size and showed it to him. He scrolled around on the page as if he were trying to find something that'd prove me wrong, but there was nothing. My reservation was right there on my phone. He told me ""well, you should really call to verify your reservations"" and I said, ""Oh, does this happen a lot here?"" he said, ""No, that's never happened. This is the first time I've ever seen that happen."" As if I made everything up! I tried to explain that I changed my reservation a couple times and that might be why, and he said ""no, that wouldn't be the reason."" So wtf is the reason then? Not that I care, but he just stood there making it seem as if I forged a reservation on my phone or something. Ridiculous. After a couple minutes of just telling me he doesn't see the reservation and ignoring the fact that it was on my phone he said he'll try and find us a table, as if it was such a huge favor. They took us to the back, as far away from the windows possible and sat us in some table right behind a pillar, so the only view we could've gotten was then blocked.   I was very upset. The whole reason why I chose this place for my mom's birthday is because they wanted a decently priced restaurant with a view. Instead, we got a shitty table in the back of the room behind a pillar that we paid a total of $114 for. I could've gotten a better ambiance at Olive Garden with employees 5x more polite and a bill half as high. At least the food was good...too bad my appetite was spoiled before we even sat down.   To make matters even worse. I went home and checked my email, only to find that Maggiano's marked me as a NO SHOW on Open Table. How the F*ck did they mark me as a no show if my reservation was supposedly NOT THERE?! 100 points out the window. I had to contact customer service to explain that I was there and take a picture of my receipt for proof, so I wouldn't have the no show on my record. Their response, ""Based on our diagnostics, your reservation was in the restaurant's electronic reservation book, but for some reason this was not conveyed to you. Thank you for making us aware of this discrepancy!"" Hmm, I wonder why that happened?  Very upset with Maggiano's and that heavy set host/supervisor man, so much that I don't plan on coming back here anymore. I'll Splurge on Capital Grille instead if I want that same view."							
35ZRNT9RUIEFE9EZJOMPUAJATQ6O37	"2.5 stars.  We ate here mid-week at 7:30. Arrived and were told it's a 20-30-minute wait. We said we called to make reservations, but they told us that they didn't take them until 8:30, AND said there would be no wait. Girl at the front desk said oh, we take reservations 90 minutes or more out. Oh okay, please tell us that next time.  We were seated about 30 minutes later, outside (yay!). Our waiter appeared quickly and we ordered beverages. Sadly, none of our drinks - water, coke, or beer - were ever refilled. Nobody even noticed that my husband was out of both water and coke and that I gave him my water to tide him over. Not that we could have notified our waiter; most of the time, he was not to be found.  We ordered shrimp linguine and angel hair with tomato sauce. The half orders, contrary to what we've heard, barely fed 2 adults, and we're not gluttonous eaters. Angel hair was decent, but nothing to write home about. Skip the side salad - it was iceberg lettuce, whole grape tomatoes, and dry croutons. You can either have italian dressing or blue cheese. Apparently, those are your choices.  Our server was very polite, but he was very rushed; it was hard to get him to linger at the table for a moment, and as I mentioned, he never noticed our empty glasses, nor offered any refills. We sat with a pile of empty plates at the end of the meal for a long time before he reappeared and asked if we wanted dessert."							
3URJ6VVYUP30W5X3J2R84FBG7Q34O9	"3 1/2 - 4 **** Located in the Fashion Show Mall, tons of parking and glass windows to enjoy the scenery.   Reservations highly recommended as it can get very busy.   I've eaten here several times and for some reason I keep coming back.  It must be the large portions and great service.   Food:  Spinach Salad- Tender leaf spinach tossed with diced red peppers, roasted red onions and Gorgonzola cheese, yummy applewood smoked bacon, toasted pine nuts and apple cider vinaigrette.  Tomato Caprese-Sliced tomatoes topped with fresh mozzarella and basil, drizzled with a balsamic glaze and Crispy Calamari.   Dinner:  Lobster Carbonara- It  was dry so I would never order it again.  Mom's Lasagna with Meat Sauce Beef Tenderloin Medallions  It' really not a bad place despite of what others has said.   To me it's reasonably priced, service was great and I love the complimentary bread."							
3OJX0UFJ0ZNW6GNCWJZ8KTELB459UN	"3 1/2 stars to be fair.  I went to Maggiano's for lunch during a business seminar.  Don't you just love some free food every once in a while for all your hard work?  It was certainly a nice treat for me!  After initial introductions and the start of the seminar, food starting coming out of the kitchen.  All served family style which was a bit odd for me because I barely knew the two dozen people in the room!  But ah, not a big deal as long as none of them had herpes or mono...or a cold for that matter.  Our appetizer courses came first:  along with warm French bread (excellent) we had the:  *Tomato Caprese - tomatoes topped with fresh mozzarella and basil, topped with olive oil and balsamic glaze  *Mozzarella Marinara - breaded mozzarella with marinara sauce  *Maggiano's Salad - Iceberg and romaine lettuce with bleu cheese, crispy prosciutoo, red onions, topped with their signature dressing  Pretty good start!  The salad was crisp, but my fav was the Tomato Caprese, sweet and ripe tomatoes with the silky cheese and the acidic touch from the balsamic?  Very nice!  I didn't try the Mozzarella Marinara in trying to keep with my P90X diet...damn you I say Tony Horton!  Next up was our main courses:  *Chicken Parmesan - Breaded chicken breasts baked with Provolone cheese and marinara sauce over spaghetti  *Our Famous Rigatoni 'D' - Rigatoni with herb-roasted chicken, mushrooms, and caramelized onions with a Marsala cream sauce  *Mom's Lasagna-Meat Sauce - Pasta layered with Ricotta cheese, meatballs, Italian sausage, and marinara sauce, topped with Provolone cheese and meat sauce  Nice!  All were good.  Unfortunately, I ate like a banshee here...I dug the Chicken Parmesan and Mom's Lasagna very much!  The sauce was great, not too sweet, not too tart, and complemented the dishes very well.  Oh my thighs...the horror!!!  After the business presentation dessert was brought out:  *Apple Crostada - Granny Smith apples baked in a pastry crust topped with crystallized sugar, topped with caramel sauce and vanilla bean ice cream  *Chocolate Zuccotto Cake - Chocolate cake layered with sambuca chocolate mousse, iced with chocolate frosting, then dusted with cocoa powder  At this point I was too full to have any more!  But I gave in and had a bit of the Apple Crostada.  Yummy to my tummy!  The tart apples went well with the sweet sugar crust.  Good way to end the meal.  Bad way to end my diet!  Food here is great for a chain restaurant.  The ambiance is nice, dark woods and colors.  It would be very nice for a date night out.  I may just come back here again and actually shell out my Visa to try more of their dishes.  As a note though, I did look through the menu and see a lot of their dishes are on the pricey side.  But, one dish could probably feed two people easily.   Thankful for my one day reprieve...I am back to my P90X diet and the ramblings of the Devil's Spawn named Tony Horton.  One more push up or pull up and I think I'm gonna be sick!"							
3UUIU9GZC5LY5G6BTOWH3HNH6UET5O	"3.5 stars  Our server was incredibly nice and the Calamari appetizer was delicious.  I ordered the Linguini al Mare and the description made it sound like pasta with marinara sauce and seafood. It was actually like a cioppino, which is not my favorite thing and having the linguini sitting in seafood sauce wasn't great. If you like cioppino though, they are very generous with the seafood.  My bf got the Salmon Orzo and he said it was way too salty. Still pretty good, but it needed more sauce or something to balance out the salt.  We were kind of disappointed, which is sad because we LOVE this place, especially the one in LA."							
3T5ZXGO9DE4JKEY8J892NGJPNMNQZE	"4 +.   Yes, it's a chain & pretty much the same in all their locations, but it is just so damn good.  (PSST  there's a $10 off $30 purchase coupon available on their website)   We were seated at the time on our reservation and treated to very attentive service.  The house chianti was good.  Bread was served soon after we were seated and waiter was kind enough to bring out some red pepper flakes and Italian herbs that we could add to the olive oil.  The waiter explained that they were no longer doing half orders & I thought I understood him to say that the menu had been redone and the portions as well as prices were now smaller.  No matter--the lady at the next table had a rather large platter of food and I was pretty sure we weren't going hungry.  I had linguine with shrimp & garlic  (what, I like red wine with that), and my friend had the rustic chicken & shrimp.  I love that they are not afraid to use the garlic here.  My shrimp were big and cooked perfectly and the sauce enhanced it beautifully without overwhelming the seafood.  And there were leftovers (just as good for breakfast the next day).  For around $16 a plate (before the coupon), it's hard to find food this good in Vegas."							
3KVQ0UJWPX1QXXA5OT1SQ1UGAOWW5H	"4stars-1star 4stars for the food. I Love Maggiano's. Their baked four cheese raviolis in creamy pesto sauce could not be more ah-mazing.Buyer beware, the half order is more than enough to fill you up! And another fair warning: the mama's lasagna could probably feed a family of five. Ok, if you have a huge appetite, maybe a family of three. 1star for the server. The SERVICE was great. We were seated quickly, the food came out quickly, had a great table with a view of the outside of Fashion Show Mall. But our server really...screwed up? He asked us where we were from and we responded ""California"" and he proceeded to tell us what bad drivers we are...umm does he know we are the ones who tip him? Regardless us this gentleman's faux pas I still tipped him 20%. Hopefully he'll learn to keep his big mouth shut next time he gets one of us crazy Californian drivers."							
37Y5RYYI0PL6SZD6AUAMLVIFXAASX8	"5 stars is not enough to describe this experience. Service provided by Zack added to the amazing ambiance of Toros. It is a must do for all visiting Vegas. Hands down the best meal we have had while here. The escargot, antipasto platter and padron peppers were delectable. The bread pudding melts in your mouth and is a flavor explosion combined with the sauce and ice cream. Drive as quickly as allowed to Toros. It will be an experience you are sure to become addicted to!"							
3Z56AA6EK4GQBPG5PA5A996P8HUM6X	5 stars!!!!!!!!! everything was delicious and perfect! I tried the lobster tilipia and it tasted like heaven. And the salmon had crabs on top of it...so delicious!!!! the creme brulee for dessert was awesome!!!!! everything i ate here was so yummy!!!!!!!!!!!							
3T6EIBTM9L4QWQJJIKWHGNDBAJVAAR	"7 of my girls and I went to Vegas to celebrate 2 of their birthdays. We didn't have the coupon for BOGO but he still let us take home 7 classic pastas home for free with the order of 7 classic pastas at the mention of the coupon. Service was great and I can't get enough of the balsamic vinegar nd oil and bread. Although he did forget about the birthdays and i had to remind him again to bring out the cookies in the end. Since it WAS a classic pasta, the lasagna was a little dry, fettucini was extremely bland, but the spaghetti was really goodand came with a good portion.This was my 2nd time here And the first time was in San Jose. My first experience was better because we didnt do the BOGO and ordered specialty pastas and seafood. But I guess you get what you pay for."							
3W0XM68YZPB0EFF5YSGDZ0N4B1JK1S	"a buddy of mine couldn't say enough great things about this place, so we met him and his girlfriend here last night for our first try.   it was very quiet and quite empty, but that didn't turn us off. i started with the calderita margarita, a very large and tasty drink with a peppery kick. we had the fish taco appetizer and i thought it was very good. the mango salsa added a nice spicy/sweet flavor.   my entree was a seafood ""soup"" in a white sauce. honestly though, as i was eating it, it didn't have any mexican flavor...it was more of an italian style dish. plus, several of my clams weren't steamed open, which means somethings wrong. the very least, they should've removed them from the dish. i've read if you eat unopened clams, you can get extremely ill. my wife had the shrimp diablo. yes, they were very hot, but at 24 bucks, i thought she'd get more than 4-5 shrimp.   the chips and salsa were fine. we had to keep asking for more chips and never got the salsa's refilled...big disappointment. they did not pass the water glass test. our server was sweet, but hard to find. what disappointed me the most was what our dining companions had to say. his g-friend had the calderita as well and had to send it back. minutes later, my buddy had to have his calderita sent back. he was disappointed in his normally outstanding pasta dish. they both apologized for suggesting Caldero and said our experience this night wasn't indicative of their previous dining experiences there.   and they advertise as a tequila bar, but we never saw a menu for tequilas...maybe if you sit at the bar. overall, i thought our dishes were overpriced and lacked Mexican inspired flavors. our friends will be back as they had previously good experiences, but we have other places we want to try so i doubt we'll be back."							
3ZQA3IO31B7J460KWK866H4DV6T1OT	"A coworker of mine selected this restaurant as her birthday lunch destination when I offered to treat. And what the birthday girl wants, the birthday girl gets... so off we went! This was literally my First Watch - I had never even heard about this place until she mentioned it.   The inside is just as some other reviewers have pointed out, very cafeteria like yet still cheerfully bright. It definitely gives off a ""Good Day Sunshine"" breakfast vibe.  We sat down in a not so comfortable cafeteria style booth, and I began to scan the menu. The options looked decent but boring, and spanned the spectrum of usual omelet, egg, bacon, pancake, griddle, wrap, sandwich and salad dishes. First Watch also has ""The Healthier Side"" - a portion of their menu dedicated to those watching their waistline. I thought that was a nice touch.   The coffee tasted like warm water with brown food coloring in it, very unimpressive. I ordered the No. 5 - an Asian salad with chicken, romaine lettuce (yuck), wontons, cashews, cilantro and carrots with the ginger sesame dressing on the side. This salad was not impressive at all, and it needed more toppings to combat the bland romaine lettuce. I just picked at it throughout the entire meal.   The birthday girl ordered the Black 'n Blue Wrap - roast beef, blue cheese, tomato, lettuce and horseradish sauce wrapped up in a spinach tortilla. She was impressed with her meal, so maybe I should have gotten a wrap instead! However, I probably won't go back for my Second Watch to find out.   Overall, First Watch is decent. The service is fast yet friendly and the food is mediocre. The breakfasty-brunchy-lunchy menu was a step up from an IHOP or Denny's because First Watch's food isn't as greasy. So if I had to compare, I would say First Watch's menu resembles The Good Egg's menu - although I think that The Good Egg's food quality, presentation and flavor is much better.   If you're looking for a breakfast place open early in that general area, I suggest you drive a little further up Central to the Park Central Shopping center and hit up The Good Egg. In my opinion, their salads are tastier and their coffee is stronger."							
3YLPJ8OXX8TNQEBVKTE4NS29JU8X47	"A coworker recommended this place and I am sure glad she did! After a long day of travel, this place really hit the spot. The patio was nice in the evening and not too loud with street traffic. The calamari was delicious, as we the mushroom tortellini and eggplant parm. The food was rich, delicious and flavourful as very well priced, especially on the strip.  The sangria pitcher was a little disappointing though. It had a ton of ice and the server put a ton of ice in our glasses as well. it really diluted the flavour."							
3LXX8KJXPWP1TB3F0XNZLNMWTIG9O9	"A dinner for four people cost $200. For a neighborhood spot, we just couldn't imagine eating here regularly. They did a great job with the interior and it seems like a fun spot for after work drinks.  Plus: The sliders and oxtail. Our server was personable (he ended up in the weeds and we had to get his attention multiple times for dishes and the check)  Cons: The grilled shrimp and salmon had very little flavor It took 5 minutes to get our first few tapas dishes, leading us to think that they had been sitting under a heat lamp and 45 minutes to get our last two tapas dishes."							
3KG2UQJ0MJ4P3PKPGKY8STCGD8FQNX	"A great place to visit if you are sick of the hotel buffets! The atmosphere was nice and cozy. We came in on a Saturday night and our option was to wait 4 minutes or sit at the bar for dinner. We sat at the bar! The food was great, huge portions! We figured out after the fact that they specialize in family portions. I ordered the half order of lobster ravioli and it was delicious! Five huge raviolis stuffed with big chunks of lobster and a great sauce! The portion of sauce was just right, it was not drowning in it! My friend ordered the Caesar salad and when they brought it out we actually started laughing because it was so huge! He managed to eat the whole thing though! As for drinks I had the watermelon martini and he had the classic martini...both were great! I would definitely visit again..."							
3AA88CN98PJX4LQ8AHNMDNYEIMRKYP	"A lot of food from breakfast places tend to taste of fatigue and depressed cooks, but not here. Food tastes fresh, nice portions, and great variety on omelettes and sandwiches. Waffles and pancakes taste fresh and fluffy, and helps with the depression of being in Downtown Phoenix. The staff is always great--feels like a folksy 1950's movie because they're mostly moms who ply on the coffee and food and tell you to eat your veggies."							
3T8DUCXY0NMH638NWE9YFXSJSQX9TV	"A lot of restaurants send out appetizers on small plates and call them tapas, but for a truly authentic menu of Spanish classics there are only three choices that I know of in Las Vegas- TOROS, Jaleo and Julian Serrano. The only real difference between the food at the other two is that those places cost about two to three times more!   I have been to TOROS three times now and I have tried almost everything on the menu (including four types of their Pallea!). Having authentic Spanish food brings back great memories of the times I spent living in Spain, the amazing sights and the friendly people.  I have been to Jaleo and Julian Serrano at least half a dozen times each, and they, like TOROS, are spot-on when it comes to authenticity.    Brian B. said that the pitchers of Sangria seemed expensive but at four glasses per pitcher that works out to $7.50 per glass.  It seems pretty reasonable for hand crafted and properly made sangria, especially since it's basically impossible to find even a cheap glass wine for $7.50 a glass.  I also read another comment about only having one beer on tap, but they didn't mention that it is Estrella Damm one of the most popular beers in Spain.  Having a real Estrella with authentic tapas is actually a thoughtful, authentic touch at TOROS.  While eating at TOROS I met several people that actually have experience with genuine Spanish cuisine from having lived or traveled a lot in Spain or having gone to very authentic Spanish restaurants, like the reviewer Anarae A.  They all agreed that TOROS is amazingly authentic.  If there is something on the menu that you are not familiar with, just open your mind to something different and enjoy the flavors and culinary style of old-world Espaa at TOROS!"							
3ZQX1VYFTDL1F6K5V5HLLRRL9CYO8Z	A much better and more reasonable priced option on the strip. It really captures the essence of an old school Italian joint and the food was excellent and reasonably priced with all things considered. We ordered the chicken marsala which was to die for as well as a ceasar salad and grilled salmo							
3V8JSVE8YY6UILYYEVCJFSL9YPWEY0	"A must have! My husband and I had the lasagna and the chef Mann's country style pasta- two completely different dishes but both equally delicious and comforting. Visually beautiful, an array of textures, and the smell.... Mmmmmm.   The staff was quick and courteous. We hardly waited at all for seating and food (we arrived at 3pm).  Oh and while we didn't take advantage of it this time- they offer a nice happy hour menu."							
3ZUE82NE0AH79T7CW2YVYXI7HB7F84	"A nice little cafe with all-day breakfast.  It's fast, cheap and friendly. Two poached eggs on toast is 3.70 and a latte, while not exactly stunning, is a measly 2 flat. Perhaps a bit too 'clean' to be officially considered a greasy spoon.  ;-)"							
3SBX2M1TKD33HHAJYFJCTK6GMRKQ42	"A previous reviewer mentioned Ihop and Denny's.  Right on.  Might as well mention LePeep and other bland, vanilla, overcrowded ""restaurants"" too.  All I will say is this: Until you've had a waitress dripping with sweat (Dripping!) deliver your food, you can't complain.  So, I guess we CAN complain.  Grow up...Go someplace real."							
3S1L4CQSFXLLSH0RT0I9UOO27Z7FA8	"A rating of 2.5 would be appropriate.  Since we were there to watch a basketball game, I asked the bartender to change the channel on one of the overhead screens and advised our waiter to be prepared for a leisurely dinner.   We started off with a glass of pinot noir and a Fat Tire at happy hour prices plus orders of grilled eggplant (2 slices of grilled eggplant topped with goat cheese and tomatoes) (2.5 out of a possible Forks), bacon wrapped dates (2 Forks) and pil pil Shrimp (21-25 ct shrimp in a garlic, paprika, white wine and parsley sauce. (3 Forks).  The latter was served on a hot plate and proved to be the best of the tapas though the shrimp were slightly overcooked.   On the second round we ordered seared salmon over spinach topped with bechamel sauce (2.5 Forks), ham croquettes (2.5 Forks) and piquillo peppers stuffed with goat cheese and crab with tomato sauce (2.5 Forks).  We thought portion sizes were very small given the price and very average quality.   Fortunately, I had a Groupon."							
3P888QFVX3A7LAK1HZYL7ICL3IKQOC	"A solid 4 stars.....  This place was pretty damn good. I know it's a chain and I would have thought I would have been to one by now considering they are all over the place in the DMV area. Surprisingly so, I had not and my first visit to a Maggiano's Little Italy in Las Vegas was a pleasant one. When I arrived they had to tap a keg for a Newcastle that I wanted, this was sort of annoying because it felt like forever but I was watching football (and gambling on it) at the time.  Our waitress was a real sweetheart, and she checked on us regularly. I had a few (2) beers before my meal and they didn't seem to mind. The ambiance was really cool, but I could have told it was a chain type restaurant even if I didn't know.   The food was great. They brought out bread before the meal and we weren't very hungry so I didn't order an appetizer. I had the center cut filet mignon and the person I was with had the salmon salad. We were both very pleased with the overall meal.   I was very pleased with this chain restaurant and would go back again."							
36818Z1KV3TQC5KY95H7TFZ54933AO	"A solid and reliable wee sandwich shop, Wee Bite is nestled just off the Royal Mile, on St Mary's Street. It's simple and straightforward and chases hunger away unfussily, so if that's what you're after, this is the place for you.  Overall, we said: ""I thought Wee Bite was pretty good. It's not going to set the heather on fire, but in terms of dealing with your lunchtime hunger in a fashion that will leave you feeling satisfied, I think it showed that it was more than capable of doing so. Cost wise, it's probably priced for it's proximity to the Royal Mile, so doesn't represent fantastic value, but I'd happily pop in again if I find myself in the neighbourhood."""							
3IKDQS3DQEGTVNZFEMKL3GRINUKIC4	A special place for breakfast when we lean away from bacon and ham.							
3FULMHZ7OUDCW2CR6MCVCBMBCQO4MU	A tourist trap where location may be the only thing to recommend it.   Food at a level lower than a chain Italian and service was completely absent minded. At least they comped a drink and a meal from our party of four.  Avoid as there are so many good options why waste your limited dining experience on a restaurant that has such indifferent food and service?							
3XT3KXP24ZE4F6QE4V7IHGZ8R89I6C	"A truly authentic Chinese restaurant.The Boiled won tons are outstanding.We also ordered the Singapore noodles ,equally as good.The lettuce leaves are wonderful. In fact almost every dish is worthy of praise.  Service is good. The wine list is fairly priced . Also worth mentioning,  it is a kid friendly Restaurant."							
30ZKOOGW2WMU226JM13O5MK86PPA13	"A very pleasant restaurant, Maggiano's had very food food at a medium to high price range.  The steak I ordered was cooked exactly to my request which 9.75 times out of 10 doesn't happen.  Our waiter did seem to push for us to order more food than we wanted though."							
37SOB9Z0SSD78OB26W6X2TFGYL23L6	Absolutely love this place! The food is great and the service is even better. I highly recommend the seared calamari with a side of bread to dip in the ink sauce!  This last time I tried the paella and it was definitely delicious! It's enough for at least 3-4 people so come hungry!							
379OL9DBSSUDNP7H6KWXNEKY7SFY99	"Absolutely terrible food. Paying a dinner price for lunch leftovers is anathema to my wife and me. The wait staff are superb, and very nice. The Orleans has other places to eat on site, so avoid this one at all cost."							
3VP28W7DUN0MTP8Z5SY8BHFBGKEZFT	"After a long and tiring day at Magic tradeshow, the team came here to feast! I was pretty hyped since it was my first time. The 5 of us ordered the classic family style which was I believe $35 a person. Not that cheap, but do-able.  Service was utterly non-existent. Food took forever inbetween servings, we're talking about 20-25 min inbetween each dish...even appetizers..  That's pretty damn bad. As you could expect, we got full just sitting there, so had so much food non taken advantage of.  Maggiano's...not a good way to treat the customers.   If I come back..and that's a pretty strong IF, I would hope they actually serve our table.  Meh.  -Goodfood.LA"							
31N9JPQXIPYCQWLMXUBEJFKFMLKHNT	"After a long day and nite of work, headed to Maggiano's for a late nite supper.  Small side salad...GOOD...Spaghetti w/ marinara...GOOD...Portions...HUGE...  Waiter was really nice too, even though we came late and stayed late."							
33KGGVH24UX6YFECXBV2PUV67AYX1U	"After a long hard day of shopping, I wandered upstairs to a restaurant called Maggiano's.  I am so happy I did!  The restaurant itself sounded familiar but I knew I had never dined there before.    Our server Daniel was very attentive and personable, it was my first visit to Las Vegas so he pointed out many things that we could do in our spare time.  This restaurant had a great view.  You could see Las Vegas Blvd, people shopping, or other diners just like me.  Everyone around us seemed to be enjoying their experience at Maggiano's and we were definitely enjoying ourselves!  We started our dining experience with the Bruschetta.  It was definitely some of the best bruschetta I have ever had.  I make a pretty killer bruschetta and I was extremely impressed with shredded chunks of parmesan covering the top of the bruschetta.  Splendido!!  The bruschetta was served on Italian Garlic Bread that was topped with a tomato bruschetta relish made of tomatoes, balsamic vinegar, and roasted garlic.  We also ordered: the Chopped Salad, the Tuscan Sausage & Orzo Soup, and the Fettuccine Alfredo.  The Chopped Salad was very good.  I ordered it without green onions.  The salad ingredients were iceberg lettuce, tomatoes, blue cheese, avocado, and prosciutto tossed in a house dressing.  Most of the items on the menu, they give you the option to order half or the full portion.  Believe me when I say half is plenty when you want to eat more than just one thing.  I ordered the whole chopped salad and it was really big.  The Tuscan Sausage & Orzo Soup contained italian sausage, fennel, white beans and tomatoes.  It was really tasty.  The Fettuccine Alfredo was delicious!  It was prepared with broccoli and garlic in a creamy alfredo sauce.  We only ordered the half portion of that as well and it was really large.  Overall my experience at Maggiano's was great from start to finish.  Our waters were never left empty, and our server was always around if we needed anything.  It seemed like all the servers we saw there were on top of their game waiting tables because you never saw a table that needed anything that they couldn't ask the server for.  If you around the Fashion Show Mall and you spot Maggiano's on the 2nd floor, you should definitely wander up there and grab a bite to eat because I assure you it will be worth it.  I will definitely wander back into a Maggiano's even if its not in Las Vegas.  Cheers and Enjoy!"							
373L46LKP7M79WV9OHMJ30JQ5IIKJV	"After a tip off from my boss this place has become my regular lunch stop. The food is by no means thrilling, but does fill me up for most of the afternoon. it's pretty cheap too if you're looking for a fast and frugal lunch.   Everything has cheese on it in this shop, that you can eat anyways..."							
37PGLWGSJTMBELB36Z1JRZ4QS3TIKH	"After extremely abusive service at Maggiano's tonight, I'm calling it quits. The food was burned and the server was so rude that we didn't feel comfortable with the scene that we thought complaining would have caused. It went sort of comical at first, but the longer the service continued for, the more abusive it got until it was downright hostile at the end.  It all started with drinks we ordered at the bar; the hostesses told us it would be a 20-25 minute wait, so we ordered there. Our table was ready in 10, so we settled up at the bar (the bartender was incredibly nice, btw) and took he drinks to our seat. The waitress was clearly agitated that we already had drinks and said she didn't bring us bread because we might have just gotten that at the bar too (you only get bread with dinner, so that was a very clear dig). My girlfriend said ""are we being punished for having drinks already?"" when the waitress left the table, and it was obvious we were.    She paid attention to the table's around us and didn't even make eye contact with us. She finally asked about the food hallways through our meal by saying ""it's good, right"" while looking at the plate of burned cannelloni that was sitting mostly uneaten (I'm posting pictures). When a server asked a question like that as brusquely as she did, she sin't looking for the truth, so I kept my mouth closed while my girlfriend said her dinner was fine. She asked us if we wanted desert or more drinks and when we said no, she plopped down our dirty plates back down at the edge of the table and stormed off to get our check. She dropped it at the table and that was the last we saw of her.   We talked it over while trying to make change between the two of us and left her a 10% tip. I don't believe in less than 15% typically (we left the bartender 30%), but she was so rude I think that I should have left nothing.    I used to take people here all the time (and it was recommended in my Las Vegas list) because the atmosphere was nice, the view is great and the food was reliable. Lately, none of that has been true and I'm done trying to weather out a bad time at Maggiano's. I've been to this location 5 times in the last year (I'm the duke of checkins here on Yelp), but tonight will probably be the last. Disinterested service I can overlook and even incapable service is something I'll suffer through for decent food or the right occasion. I've learned my lesson tonight though; there are too many better places that are only a stones throw away."							
391JB9X4ZYOXA41UREZBJSB79CDKMZ	"After several visits to John Cutter's next door, we were tempted away to Toros. Being a long time Tapas fan, and with Firefly in the news every other week, we really wanted to like this place. After reading mixed reviews, I was concerned, and hungry...ok, more hungry than concerned.  I have a rule about new places. I assume that the servers know what's best. I often ask the servers to bring me the best, and leave it at that. Some servers shudder, some embrace the challenge, some know their menu so well, they barely blink before deciding what to bring. Our server, Omar, was the third type. He quickly decided on three items, all perfect, then two more, still perfect. What did we have? Well, come on by and ask your server. You see, our drinks and menu items were tailored to our tastes. Your experience may be different, but I hope, equal to our experience.  I saw a lot of poor reviews from a few months ago, but my understanding is that they have a new chef. Check it out, it may be better than you had previously experienced.  -Skacey, former Elite :-)"							
3ZXV7Q5FJB49LWXPDEE00JEQ72TFCB	"After walking for what seemed hours(and probably was), my family and I decided to eat here.  It's conveniently located in the Fashion Show Mall...so after a day's shopping and gambling at the nearby Venetian and Palazzo...some Italian food sounded good. We went around 3PM, so it was not crowded at all.  We were immediately seated and service was prompt.   The appetizer we chose which was stuffed mushrooms was quite delicious and I would order these again. My dish was a Shrimp Risotto which wasn't a part of the regular menu, but a special they had.  I thought it was good, but it didn't ""wow"" me.  I probably wouldn't order it again. My mom had a Beef Tenderloin dish...and because she invariably cannot finish her meal, she offered some to me.  I found the beef to be very good, and in fact wished I had ordered that instead. My brother ordered a Lobster Carbonara dish which he was disappointed with because they mistakenly did not put bacon in the dish...even though it is listed and most carbonara's should have it.  I got a bite of the lobster in it and thought it was okay. Overall, the meal was good and I would probably eat here again, but would try another dish.  The prices here are not too bad.  About $60 for three of us including appetizer and drinks."							
3HEM8MA6H9SP6AW2WZB0WIHBDNGPQS	"Again, not impressed, although my dinner experience was a thousand times better than my solo lunch experience. I am not willing though to rate to a higher level as this dinner on many levels fell flat. I should have known, but kept my hopes up none the less. My husband and I were invited to a date night dinner here, so we went along for the ride.  First off, service was a tad better this time around. Our waiter was a bit of an odd-ball though. I have to give him props for getting me a cocktail in just in time for the Happy Hour price. He was also incredibly knowledgeable about the restaurant's extensive menu. Happily telling us all kinds of things, including his opinion of the Marsala sauce that is very unlike his Italian grandmothers.  Appetizers:  Calamari Fritte, served with marinara. It was fried Calamari. Luckily though it was not soggy or gross. It was fried up nicely and with a spritz of lemon and a bit of the sauce was a decent app.   Spinach & Artichoke Al Forno - I am a fan of artichokes in apps. My favorite though it basically just grilling the artichoke and serving it to me as is. However, I was not impressed with this dip. It is baked in an Asiago and Alfedo-like cheese sauce and it just did not have any zing to make it any better than any other spinach dip I have had.  Crab & Shrimp Cannelloni ($18.50) - Ugh! What a waste of money. This dish came out in a POOL of cheese sauce. Literally, the entire plate was cheese sauce. The menu description says this, ""Asiago cheese sauce and breadcrumbs"". No. There were no breadcrumbs. My plate was a goopy pile of cheese sauce, with three lone Cannellonis that had, perhaps, 4-5 pieces of shrimp. The peppers included did not enhance the meal one bit. The cannelloni was soggy and unappetizing and the crab meat inside was like a wet mop, just smooshy and gross. I was incredibly disappointed in this dish.  I wish I had gotten the Spaghetti and Meat Sauce, which is what my husband got, and he cleaned his plate!  Creme Brulee ($7.95) - A huge portion of creme brulee served in a trough. Okay, I'm just kidding it wasn't served in a trough, but it might as well have been. The dessert portions are large, so ya know, share. My husband had one spoonful of the creme brulee and I was left to eat the rest of it.  Again, as an overall opinion - it's over-priced, over-salted, overly-hyped Italian food on The Strip. It's a chain Italian restaurant I will continue to avoid."							
3DZKABX2ZILYHTJFDTJ4I5HCVWGCVV	"All I want to eat at TGI Friday's is the Baby Back Ribs, but my husband talked me out of it, and we did the appetizer ""grazing"" thing.  I was pleasantly surprised.  We had the Thai Pork Tacos, Parmesan Meatballs, Bacon Mac and Cheese Bites, and the Loaded Potato Skins.  It was awesome!    Our waiter was VERY attentive and offered to re-fill my soda several times.  He was right there when my husband finished his beer and quickly offered to get him another.    I soooo miss TGI Friday's in Hawaii!!!"							
3MYASTQBG7RGHDTCRQK5WO0MZ4DQDF	"All the food here is just really unremarkable based on my visit.  Nothing special, everything seems just unoriginal and aimed at middle of the road palates, not creating anything exceptional or memorable."							
3DIIW4IV8PBQ0JM0L7E3KIFUVH4I4S	Always a good lunch spot! Food and service are consistently good!							
3LG268AV38MLLKMC00KP7WSCV2HREB	"Always a great choice for Italian, and surprisingly, for being on the strip, they have the best prices in town! I'm never disappointed when I come here.  The food is fantastic, the service is great, and the ambiance is grand, with views of the strip throughout most of the restaurant! I recommend this place with two thumbs up!"							
3N3WJQXELS6IN6FJ2WSSJJAOS71L2C	Amazing and cheap breakfast. Everything was fresh and delicious. You get your own personal coffee pot for your table. The service was outstanding! Our waitress was so sweet and even offered a to go cup for my coffee.							
3511RHPADVUZRQW4HM7TKRIW4ZILRS	"Amazing flan, great food, cheap tasty drinks.  Color me pleased.  During happy hour until 7PM or all day Sunday it is $3 for a top shelf mojito in Scottsdale, and $5.50 for 5 street tacos.  Seriously, what is better than that?  An early reviewer said expensive, but compared to what? Taco Bell drive thru?"							
3DA79LNS59BVR1J7F58OOKPXSYO3T9	amazing food and great staff.  try the banana blitz if it is still around when you go							
3V0TR1NRVAIBU1329JMQ3KRBI9Z4AA	"Amazing Italian food.  Good service.  Great for large groups.  We had 10 people and ordered ""family style"" and had more food than we knew what to do with.  I will continue to go here every time I am in V-town."							
3TTPFEFXCT04JBFUYDPXH4YTRVV6H8	"Amazing Italian in vegas. Especially for a chain. The lobster ravioli never disappoints. The drinks are allways off the chain. The only thing that stinks is the wait.  Super location, decent prices if youre looking to dine on strip outside a casino.  Love thi splace."							
3A520CCNWNGTM30VYPY3C632VYTEAQ	Amazing!!!! The _evap_i_i (sausages) are out of this world!! Best I ever had outside of Europe...by far! Fresh Bread a bottle of Karlova_ka (beer) and great service...how can you loose?							
34O39PNDK6ONEHASQ9IZ6OMRS54RBB	"An average PF Chang, Cheesecake Factory quality chain restaurant located at the very fashionable Fashion Show Mall.  For Vegas, this might be 5-star but for me it is only 3.  Sorry.  Bring your appetite -- portions are buffet style."							
3EQVJH0T401AL9Q6UQXQSEQ7B36HTU	"Another affordable dining spot on the Strip for those times when you've just bet everything on red and it's 27 black.  Fare is solid American-Italian in a spacious dining room on the second floor of Fashion Show mall. The Linguine di Mare is the stuff of my foodie dreams: linguine noodles (the best kind) in a spicy tomato sauce (not spicy enough for me) smothered in seafood goodness like plump, juicy shrimp, mussels, clams and lobster. My only regret was I had to leave some of the pasta behind or risk blowing chunks atop the Stratosphere after (stupid stomach that's sensitive to stupid spinning)!  My boyfriend's Lobster Carbonara could solve world hunger. There was so much of it! It was creamy deliciousness bathed in lobster groupies. Yuuuum!  Service was pretty slow, though, so try not to come during peak lunch hour on Saturday."							
338431Z1FLV7XBZ1UENLC8MQZ4NORC	"Another chain restaurant where we decided to check out the Vegas branch. This was a very large location, with a fun view of the strip. Service was attentive and friendly, and our food was fine- definitely edible, but nothing special. My peach bellini was my favorite part."							
3BC9H1KCYUSOZLKPZV6P1YS95T1WYY	"Another night at Maggiano's, and another excellent dinner!    We started with fine complimentary warm bread and butter in our reserved booth with a window view of the Strip, and moved on to enjoy outstanding Calamari Fritte--excellent tentacles and first-rate golden rings, along with the cheerfully provided Lemon Aioli we had requested to accompany Marinara Sauce.  A bowl of Orzo & Sausage Soup was also well prepared and excellent as a whole,  with sausage just tangy enough to make it intriguing.  Although Iced Teas regularly arrived unbidden, I had to ask for butter twice.  It was quickly produced after the second request.  Cold crisp Romaine leaves bathed in a thin application of a nice traditional Caesar Dressing, and small crunchy croutons dominated an excellent side Caesar Salad.  Belatedly I asked for a single anchovy (semi-health consciousness at work!) and it was duly brought in its own ceramic cup to further enhance this course.   Great cheesy Fontina Potatoes represented a perfect blend of cooked potato slices and Fontina Cheese, and were more than enough to share with Diane.  This time my entree of Linguini & Clams was superb, with a fine light white wine sauce, 9 clams still in the beds of their opened shells, and a generous amount of supplemental chopped clams.  Meanwhile, Diane did her best to attack 3 large medallions of Veal Parm with excellent yummy Alfredo Sauce accompanied by al dente Rigatoni Alfredo.  At meal's end she still had enough food left over for a very satisfying lunch two days later, and we were both too full to order dessert.  Once again I unintentionally dropped and left items under our dining table.  This time when I pulled up on the driveway of my North Las Vegas home, I found that both a filled pill case and all of my house keys were missing from my coat pocket.  After a call to the restaurant and a check under our former table by restaurant management, all items were found.  So, for the second time in 13 months after dining here, I headed back to Fashion Show Mall, and retrieved my dropped items from the check-in desk.  They had been found on the floor of the same booth where my Kindle had been inadvertently abandoned on a previous visit.  So, in the future I either have to avoid this particular booth or take better care of my important personal possessions.  I think I will concentrate on the latter course of action!"							
39I4RL8QGJXQ4OBGFPWIK6EFV4PH4Y	"As far as chain breakfast spots go, this isn't half bad. I'd pick it over the Good Egg for dcor alone, which is much less country kitchen and more...well...this location looks kind of strange. It's like walking into an 80s after-school soda fountain shaped like a Der Wienerschnitzel. The food? Not mind-blowing, but well above average, too. The eggs are cooked just right, and I happen to think the fresh veggies in the omelettes are about as crisp and tasty as you're going to find. The coffee is on par with Denny's, so take that for what it's worth. I'll take this over an IHOP any day, that's for sure."							
3XBYQ44Z6PKSIZLVPPJQTH0UQRITW5	"As far as chain restaurants go, this is one of my favorites. This particular location is awesome too, and I suspect because of it's primo Las Vegas Strip location, they are all trained to wow you with their service.  I took the wife and kid here, and I was almost ashamed to do so because of the white cloth tables. This location seemed just a tad upper class, but alas we were hungry wolfpack. And I spotted a smattering of kids here so I didn't feel as bad later.  Ordered the bruschetta, shrimp scampi, and classic spaghetti meatballs. All dishes were excellent,  esp the scampi. No complaints here. The bruschetta was super tasty, the tomatoes and olive oil made me feel like I was in Tuscany. Haha. Too much? Yeah.  Service was amazing. I didn't get the guys name but it was perfect. Friendly, but not fake, attentive, but not pyscho. Deserving of his 25% tip...only in Vegas right?  Anyway, if you got an urge for Italian but don't want snotty service at a Michelen joint, come here."							
37MQ8Z1JQEC2N5MILBHIDRCK1M5Y2H	"As far as mcdonalds go, this one is one of the better ones. I come here a lot - 27 check ins so far! Ive never had bad service here that i can recall. The management must be doing something right! Kudos to you guys! Plus the kids LOVE the indoor play area here. Its big, accessible, and closed off so my kids arent as tempted to run off. And it has its own bathroom, WITH a changing table - hard to find in vegas. They also occasionally have special events, like ronald mcdonald visiting. 5 stars."							
3EHVO81VN519CPEXS7DGM87CJKF1H5	"As I read these reviews, I can only imagine that there must be some correlation between the quality of food, and which night each chef works...we went on ""half priced tapas Monday"", and the only thing that wasnt great, was the saffron chicken(very bland and mushy)...but since it was half priced we must've ordered 13 different tapas and all the rest were spectacular... I recommend the potatoes, steak, scallop, hell even the escargot was pretty good.."							
3UEBBGULPF457QEPZ5Z0UP0WE2ZFUK	"As I was shopping at Fashion Show Mall I noticed this Italian restaurant and made a mental note to check it out on Yelp later for a possible dinner option.  According to Yelp this place was worth trying. I used the open table feature to make a reservation (not knowing if it was really needed or not, but I figured why not). I'm glad I did. When we made it in to the restaurant it was packed and there was a wait. We were seated immediately.   We were seated in a comfortable booth seat, and served water immediately and given some explanation of the menu. This place had a good variety of Italian food from pastas, to chicken, beef and seafood selections. I liked that they had a family style option as well. At first glance I would say this place looks pricey specially since your entre comes with just your entre no salad or soup like Olive Garden.   We ordered a side salad to share that was $4.95 but it was the perfect size for two specially since we were stuffing our faces with the yummy French bread served with olive oil and vinegar (oh so yummy, and dangerous!).   Our plates took over 30 minutes to arrive, if it was not for the bread and salad I would have been more upset.   I ordered Mom's Lasagna made with meatballs and sausage with your choice of marinara or meat sauce. I choose marinara since so much meat came with the dish already. My plate arrived and what do you know, it probably could have served four people, fairly large portions. I ate all of it, in phases but I ate it all. It was exquisite. Perfect layering, the lasagna stayed together (I hate when you cut into lasagna and the layers fall apart).   My favorite part was being serenaded by a duo (violin and guitar) to one of my wedding songs (It's Impossible). If it weren't for the Wynn in the background I could almost say I was in Italy.  I don't have any complaints about this place. Our total bill came to $37.50: two entrees, one side salad and one beverage. We came on a Monday night and it was busy so definitely try and make reservations if you can."							
3S37Y8CWI8G81E65AOIIL9O2AS1W4C	Aside from the box pasta they use I enjoyed my time here.  We made a reservation via Yelp and was immediately seated upon arrival :-) The food was so-so.  The lasagna was dry and the linguine with clams sauce did not stick to the pasta.  I'm from Chicago and this maggiano's was not great.							
33CLA8O0MIRDRYM8VB4VPEDC73VFRG	"At Maggiano's, the portions are huge, and we've always found it is more economical to order several dishes and share rather than ordering off their family menu.  This location is at one end of the Fashion Show mall (http://www.yelp.com/biz/rXUBAFqrr00KvVEJ6aNURw?hrid=OYsZi4R_-xj0UuVtTe5vPg).  The non-smoking section has a Strip view; the whole place feels very airy with lots of windows.  Vegan Report: Getting the bruschetta (without cheese) and the minestrone soup (without cheese) always makes me a happy lady."							
3LXX8KJXPWP1TB3F0XNZLNMWTIH9OA	"Ate at Maggiano's Fashion Show  with my Mom and Husband, I have been to Maggiano's many times, the food has always been above average for a chain restaurant, the atmosphere being able to sit on the balcony is so nice. But please do something about the service every time the wait between courses is very very long, I feel like the kitchen is holding things up not the servers. When the server checks back in 5 times to say should be out in a minute something is wrong.... good thing the food is good :-)"							
3VDVA3ILIDVVCTJM81VY18VB4K21G6	"Ate here again, and read some of the more negative reviews here as well and was confused... But only for a little bit.  This time here, we ordered appetizers we've had before like the Ahi.  It was rather bland and definitely not as good as the past visits.   The seafood soup was mediocre at best as well.  It would seem perhaps that different cooks are preparing different days, and some of them are better than others perhaps.  The consistency seems to be rather poor, and after the last visit, we're unsure of visiting again."							
3I4E7AFQ2KF6CFLWIQ0B4R6MOVAJT1	"Ate here for my last meal during my Las Vegas trip and I am pleased to report that it was a great decision. My mom, sister, and I walked on over here from the Wynn and after a few hours of shopping, we were pretty stoked to eat. The salad was a bit heavy on the dressing, but my lasagna was a delicious monster of a thing that went straight into my belly. Also, they give FREE BREAD. Nothing beats free bread."							
3MDKGGG61Q3UOK6PY76MVN1H2PQ6TI	"Ate here last night and really enjoyed the food. I tried the crab cakes, which I really enjoyed even though I'm not a big fan of seafood. I had the Chicken and spinach stuffed Manicotti and loved it. The bathrooms were pretty dirty but it was late at night when we went. The service was good and we had a really good time there."							
3MZ3TAMYTL3X1POYWJAGSBQ4NVNIRA	ate here on CHristmas eve - great food great service							
3MJ28H2Y1EOISO13X7AI97HU7MXO5X	Atmosphere 4/5 Food is 2/5 Disappointing !!							
3VQTAXTYN31FU929U3D4BZ9BZ48UBI	Atmosphere and service were great; however the food was just average.   Lobster carbonara tasted like what you would expect from the Olive Garden. Italian sausage flat bread was ok as well.  There are plenty of other restaurants in Vegas that I would try again.							
3KG2UQJ0MJ4P3PKPGKY8STCGD8FNQU	"Attempted to book Maggiano's for a wedding rehearsal dinner. Dealt very briefly with the booking coordinator named Lori who was so unprofessional that I would not have booked this venue even if it was the LAST restaurant in Las Vegas. I am a local business owner and I am shocked at how a restaurant like Maggiano's handles their guests.  Extremely disappointed since I have used Maggiano's in the past for graduations, etc."							
3P4ZBJFX2VJIZU3UU5E1CDLTZIAWF0	"average of 4 stars WHY!!!! we were sat down by some fat little waiter who looked pissed off that he had to work for a living (sorry dude but you suck). he placed oil and balsamic into a dish but seemed to give 3 tables out of the seven around him bread (thank god he didnt do the feeding of the 5000, 3574 of them would have died of starvation)  i ordered one of the 'specials' chicken and mushroom lasagne. my experience of a lasagne is that it should be roasting hot straight out of the oven with the cheese bubbling proper italian food. this was slightly warm at best and definately cooked previously frozen and reheated in a microwave POOR! so in all food crap and service even crapper."							
3AFT28WXLFIU4CWI4RTCYGLZC83IO1	Awesome chips and salsa to start. Had the Chicken Chimi and it was great. Service staff was excellent too. Decor was modern and clean.  Highly recommend.							
34ZTTGSNJX4XTTYEDM3VN9FKRW6HQF	Awesome food. Well priced and great service.							
3OJX0UFJ0ZNW6GNCWJZ8KTELB449UM	"AWESOME PLACE! JUST DON'T  ORDER THE FOOD!  Love the atmosphere.  Love the service (Shout out to Ron! You are THE BEST!).   Love the gaming.  Love the music.   Love the picking my own utensils from the Mason jar.  But the food, AAAARRGH!  TOROS - I WANT YOU TO SUCCEED BUT YOU NEED TO STEP UP YOUR GAME WITH THE FOOD!!!  The reviews about your food being lukewarm and bland are absolutely true! The only thing you have going for you now is a captive audience (i.e. those of us who live nearby and appreciate a place close to home where we can hang out on a weekend night).   I tried you when you were new and the food was, well... lukewarm and bland.  The service was okay.  I held off on writing a review and decided to give you a second chance a few months later figuring you needed some time to work out the kinks.  The service has greatly improved, but the food... UGH!  How can you mess up CHICKEN?   I ordered both the Saffron Chicken and the Roasted Chicken.  They were horrible.  I took them home and fed them to my dogs.  That's expensive dog food.  As I write this review, I am stuffing my face with a bag of popcorn from Costco to get the ""ewe"" feeling out of my stomach.  Anyway, the lukewarm and bland food will eventually drive people away.  You've got one more shot, Toros, before I throw in the towel.  Don't get me wrong, I'll still show up occasionally to gamble, drink Sangria, and hang out with Ron, but I will NOT order any food."							
3JMQI2OLFZLVEGGKBYSOSU5HUTQNDP	awesome!!!							
3PMR2DOWOOHEOVRLENV9V9BPQVY454	"Based on a recommendation from some good friends my wife and I gave this place a try a few years back, and every year we make sure this restaurant is a part of our annual Vegas trips.   The service is always stellar and friendly. The prices are decent as well.  The portions are perfect for sharing and you just can't help but savour the wide range of flavour each dish presents itself. There is both a subtly and boldness with each pasta dish. We leave full and content but not bloated and overstuffed like you can at some pasta places. In some ways this is a nice escape from the Fashion Show mall, the views from the restaurant are wonderful, as you sit across the Wynn and the places offers a bit of calm from the strip itself.   I have had a few dishes here over the years and so far each one has been wonderful. Try something yourself as I am confidant that you will experience the flavours and enjoy the atmosphere as much as we do each year."							
31JUPBOORNKT9LH8ID1TTANRE7TL8F	"Based on just my lunch salad and a margarita Caldero is unique and above the average in Mexican Cuisine with a interesting and not average dinner menu. Many people who are not fans of Mexican might be fans here.  They have several non ordinary salads and I picked the Bass salad but they ran out so I went with the almond crusted chicken salad. It was just the right amount of chicken that wasn't heavy or oily, it was prepared nice. The salad also had jicama red peppers and pecans. The vegetables were cut nice and tasted well together. I picked the mango dressing and it wasn't sweet but savory and interesting, they also have a tamarind dressing.  I don't recall the name of the margarita I had but it was a tropical fruit one with a hint of habanaro pepper. The margarita wasn't really sweet but was flavorful sort of a peach kind of fruit flavor with sour and the mild hot pepper hit your throat at the end of your sip in a nice way. The margarita was large ($6) and does give a buzz.  I noticed marinated whole fish on the menu  and nut crusted stuffed chillies and slow cooked beefs on the menu.  Service was friendly and efficient."							
341H3G5YF0UVWLT92AFN8AS7AIQ0ZR	Based on yelp reviews we gave George's a try. I have never seen so much meat on a gyro. Yummo. For under $7 we left full and very happy. We will be back.							
3QE4DGPGBRRC4SG5VJE0Z62EG4C4GM	"Be careful where you get sat. Hostess sent us to a long rectangular bar table right behind the hostess stand, yet there is no waiter service there, as we found out from the three other couples that were in the same predicament.  After some discussion with manager, we got our meal comped (all we wanted was pasta to go for the little guy).  I've been before and had a good visit, but this time was no bueno.  Kudos to manager for recognizing the situation, we were about to walk out."							
3GL25Y6843A3U401QXE09MJ95LSMXQ	"Beautiful place, very modern and classic. Super sweet staff...Awesome hidden gem in this area:)"							
31GECDVA9J2OMMVD2UYTKD93IHF667	"Been here a couple times for tapas and it's always been a pretty good experience. Last night we had the seared scallops, padron Peppers, pil pil shrimp, chicken skewers, calamari, and the lava cake.   Everything is well prepared but I did not care for the chicken skewers because it was not white meat. However, the lava cake is definitely worth the 15 mins wait.   Btw there's a groupon right now so don't miss out!"							
3NFWQRSHVEUM28DUF0AJQAZ55UKFGK	Been here several of times. So many times I can't remember. The sangria is amazing the tapas are absolutely delicious!!! Must try the sliders or anything!!! We love it all!!! Service is great!!!!!							
3DZKABX2ZILYHTJFDTJ4I5HCVWGVCE	"Before going to a show, we decided to get a bite to eat at Maggiano's. Though I should say many bites as the portions at Maggiano's are huge!  I ordered the rustic chicken and shrimp al forno with a Caesar's salad. It was really good. In fact my mom and her friend liked it so much they wished they had ordered it. The only bad part was I had to go out of town the next day so I wasn't able to keep the leftovers. It worked out great for my mom's friend though, who offered to take the leftovers!"							
30IRMPJWDZZO7KEMWMVS5R5HFZCKRN	"Before you ask what I was smoking when I gave this Friday's 4 Stars, hear me out.  I came in here for a late dinner during the week. Probably around 9PM.  It wasn't too crowded and we got to sit down right away.  The service was slow, I think they were probably spread thin. But our waiter was very friendly and other servers seem to help each other out.  The food was pretty tasty,(I may have been hungry), but never the less I thoroughly enjoyed my Jack Daniels Steak and Shrimp Dinner.  It did take a while for our food to come out which was surprising since there were not a lot of people in the restaurant, but I have no idea what the kitchen size/situation is for that place."							
3D3B8GE8927JEBFGFX0EANRM3ND9PR	"Being new to the area, I've been on a quest to find a comfortable pub with a good beer selection and good food.   After a number of disappointing excursions to some of the bars and pubs on King Street and the surrounding area, I decided to venture below Cafe1842 in the Huether Hotel.   Lion Brewery is a cozy place with a large stone fireplace, brick walls, a low wood ceiling. (My first time there was in winter so the warmth of the place stands out in my mind.)  Minimal televisions. Low but lively chatter. And solid beer choices.    You can't go wrong with a group of friends, an English Ale, and any one of the Lion's pizzas."							
3T8DUCXY0NMH638NWE9YFXSJSQXT9F	"Best breakfast/brunch place since I lived in Palo Alto in the 1980s. Different types of dishes.  WHOLE GRAINS,which I love.  Great service.  Not cheap, but worth it!"							
3EHIMLB7F7FRNPYIRSMV1IUKXQLH85	"Best Chinese food in Phoenix.  I've been going to China Chili since it's original location on Central and Osborn and followed it like many of its fans to its much larger location which accommodates all of its patrons.  I don't usually bother writing reviews for places that have over 50 reviews but after reading some of the reviews, I want to set things straight.  First of all, I've been to the Chinese Cultural Center and am not a fan whatsoever.  China Chili blows the Cultural Center out of the water.  The beauty of China Chili (and only you regulars know this), they will make everything made-to-order.  In other words, if you want white meat only, with just light sauce and medium spice, they will do it just like that and deliver it steaming hot to your table within 5 minutes.    The wait staff, if you get to know them, are extremely nice, kind and so sweet.  They may not be too chatty but don't take it personal.   So next time, if you want your Chinese food in a certain way, just ask.  They will give you exactly what you want."							
3KVQ0UJWPX1QXXA5OT1SQ1UGAOX5WR	Best Gyro I've had in years.  Tatziki (sp?) is PHENOMENAL.  I wish they sold it in jars.							
3E22YV8GG1M43DJAG7JJSOM68CTPN5	"Best gyro meat I've ever tasted, plus the owner has an infectious smile!"							
3CESM1J3EIJMG1AJTCBXI78G6J86W8	"BEST ITALIAN FOOD I'VE EVER HAD* (and I'm Italian!)  Every time my girlfriends and I visited Las Vegas we would come here at least twice (over a week holiday) to have dinner. I love that the restaurant serves up food family style (read: larger portions meant to be shared among family and/or friends) which is how Italian people serve their meals at home to their own families.   The food is authentic, delicious and the servers always know their s***. I usually go for appetizers (caprese, zucchini fritte, mozzerella marinara)  and a main (ravioli, eggplant parmesan, manicotti). One of my friends always raves about the baked ziti.   One of the best parts is that every time you ordered a main you could get a side of your choice of pasta  (from a list) with a choice of sauce for an extra 1 or 2$. We used to get this to go and eat it poolside the next afternoon for lunch. Cheap (sweet, more shopping!) and delicious!!!! I even brought some home on the flight for friends and family once.   *Obviously not counting my relatives home-made Italian cooking. And the food is on par with the food served at Terroni in Toronto, Canada."							
3DIIW4IV8PBQ0JM0L7E3KIFUVH3I4R	Best orange chicken! They use strips of chicken breast with a thin batter. The orange sauce has a tang to it. All-time favorite! I get take-out so I really can't rate the service but they are fast.							
3G9UA71JVVAJEHOP5NXAZVE4ZYJJ7P	"Best place in the valley for a gyro or Greek salad. The gyro picado is my favorite. Always made perfectly, fresh and juicy. The restaurant is clean and the staff is always friendly. They have other locations which are equally great."							
3HYV4299H0CF3F7G1REPGFX75ATE8M	"Best shrimp burro's. If it wasn't in the hood & make me cringe @ the thought of going in at night alone, I maybe would have given it 5 stars.  The staff is as friendly as any other Mexican spot. The place is kept decently clean. Don't let the outside totally deter you from at least stepping foot in the place. There's a couple TV's playing Mexican music video's to get your mind off of waiting for your order, which is surprisingly fast. Call in orders are necessary when your trying to beat the lunch rush. But any other time, you could be out the door in 10 minutes.  This place has been here for a while now. There is other La Salsita spots to go to in the valley. Some tweaked their spelling but all in all, best shrimp burro on this side of Van Buren!"							
379OL9DBSSUDNP7H6KWXNEKY7SF9YK	Best shrimp fried rice I have eaten in a while!							
33N1S8XHHM1V3AERYTJNMFBHFAW1ZV	Best Thanksgiving dinner!!!  Misty made our evening so pleasurable! Preset menu...family style...had lots to eat...even brought left overs for the next day!  Yummy!!!							
3A9LA2FRWSUH2QZQZ0YNHHBDOZUHXD	"Big, crowded, popular eatery.  Food is good, not great but I'm a food snob.  Girls at reception desk were too busy flirting with guy to greet guests, had to wait several minutes till they finally noticed I was standing there.  Ate at the bar, Jeremy the bartender was fantastic with great service and recommendations."							
3J9L0X0VDF29YKCHRJE92HZIWKG9WM	"Boy, do I love Maggiano's.   My friends and I came here on a whim while in Vegas after working up appetites shopping at the mall. Probably not the best idea since we were squeezing into tight skirts/dresses later that evening.  The wait was about 20 minutes. Once seated, we ordered one of the family style dinners, which included soup, salad, a few entrees, and dessert--way more food than we expected.  Everything was amazing, including the service. Somehow after all that food, we all still had room for dessert. We definitely ate way too much, but hey, we were in Vegas after all."							
3P888QFVX3A7LAK1HZYL7ICL3ILOQB	"Breaking News: Notorious Italian cuisine hater, Archie G., had Italian food for dinner and didn't immediately want to vomit afterwards.  On a business trip in Las Vegas, my speaking manager (who does not speak Spanish) asked me to help him take out our large limited our Latin American distributors (who don't speak English) for dinner. Somehow, I was put in charge of finding a restaurant suitable for all four of us. Normally, I shy away from huge responsibility at work. I avoid the break room so I don't have to ever have to take out the trash. That's just how lazy I am.  Anyway, with this language challenged arrangement, I knew it was going to be up to me (and my two years of Spanish in college) to keep the dinner engaging, organized, and running smoothly. Luckily for me, Maggiano's helped out with the experience.  The two Chilean clients communicated to me that they loved steak and Italian food. With the help of my Yelp Blackberry application, I suggested Benihana or Maggiano's (and tried not show sadness in my eyes). Ironically, their eyes lit up when they heard Maggiano's and the date was set.  For starters, the staff here is a superb. The hostess helped me make a reservation for a couple hours later, so I was able to give the rest of the dinner participants time to get ready, as I ran off and went shopping for a little gift for La Novia at the nearby mall. Our server was awesome. How lucky was I that the server was Chilean? He helped out immensely making our Chilean clients feel comfortable, recommending dishes and beers, and making on occasional joke or two. Great guy. Great server. Give that guy a raise.  As for the food, it wasn't terrible. We had the ""all you can eat family style"" meal, which included two salads, two appetizers, four main courses, and two desserts to share (and share and share) until we were ready to be wheeled out of the restaurant.  Appetizers: We had the ""Calamari Fritte"" and ""Stuffed Mushrooms."" The fried calamari was average and the dipping sauce was essentially Ragu. I liked the stuffed mushrooms and so did the rest of the group as had another round of it. However, I did wonder why they were not given an Italian name on the menu. Maybe the guy who wrote the menu only took 2 years of Italian in college?  Salads: The ""Chopped Salad"" was a eally good salad. There is no way it can be good for you.  We also had the ""Italian Tossed Salad"" and it was wonderful. Who doesn't love a good tossed salad by an Italian?  Main courses: We ordered 4 different main courses. The ""Spaghetti, Meatball"" and I could have made it better at home. The ""Veal Ravioli"" was pretty good. It wasn't as heavy as I had imagined. The ""Gnocchi, Tomato Vodka Sauce"" was my contribution to the group. The gnocchi just melted in your mouth. It was the best dish all night and we had another round of it. The ""The ""Salmon, Lemon & Herb"" smelled pretty bad. I was afraid to get that on my lips or fingers. I didn't want La Novia to pick me up from the airport and think I was having an affair or something.  Desserts: The Crme Brulee was pretty good. We had three rounds of this. I love burnt cream. We had the ""N.Y. Style Cheesecake"" and it well, it was just plain ol' cheesecake. I think the ""N.Y."" stood for ""Not Your."" As in, ""Not Your Style Cheesecake.""  Overall, the food was up and down and mostly mediocre. It was factory style Italian food that lacked much distinctive flavor. Essentially, it was a pricier version of ""Olive Garbage"" or ""Bucket of Crappo.""  This was no more than 2 to 2.5 star food. But the ambiance and staff helped make this a very successful business dinner. So successful, we went out on the town for an adventure that included gambling, karaoke, and general Las Vegas debauchery.  And well, I will award another star for that."							
3VADEH0UHCD1JQBFO305RIWCVB1SPK	"Cafe 9 is a lovely wee cafe on Croall Place. The simple black and white exterior is continued inside, with the odd splash of artistic colour to brighten things up. The welcome is super friendly, they have free Wifi, and the food is very good, so it does amount to a very attractive offering.  Overall, we said: ""I found Caf 9 to be a very charming place, serving good quality grub. The amiable and diligent service was greatly appreciated, too. If you're looking for a friendly and tasty little lunch in Edinburgh, this is definitely one place to add to your list."""							
3H1C3QRA01ZHFIXTI3UUI1TQV1ECEQ	calamari = bomb stuffed mushrooms = bomb veal parmesan = solid lasagna = pretty interesting taste... has an italian sausage kick to it waiter was cool and made good suggestions as well							
3TCFMTM8HE45XZBF9MA9Z41AU1X21O	"Called to make reservations for a party of 7, Hostess on the phone said they were booked and pretty busy however we can walk in and wait...   On the way down I was able to make Reservation via Internet, however we still thought the Restaurant would have at least an hour wait for a ""BUSY"" Saturday night as the Hostess stated.... come to our surprise Restaurant was far from Busy, and we were sat almost instantly.   Very pleased with the Food, Great sized Portions, Complimentary bread oil and vinegar, however being lied too over the phone was rude, and almost made us change our dinner plans for the evening...."							
3VADEH0UHCD1JQBFO305RIWCVB1PSH	"Came back to Maggiano's for what my friend and I call ""Wine Wednesday!"" We used to have this event (of 2 people, haha) every week but as we all know people get busy. I find it a great place for happy hour wine and appetizers. They have added some new items to the menu from when we used to go, but that's great!   I had last my voice the previous weekend so the bartenders were having a good time with me while I waited for my friends. They are very friendly guys and very attentive. I got there about 445pm and found seating at the bar right away. Once my friends did get there I ordered the Merlot and the bartenders were on top of it!   For food I ordered the bruschetta and crab cakes, soooo yummy! I think I could continually eat the crab cakes. Just keep them coming! Overall, my experience here is always great. The food always comes out perfect and great service. I have yet to come and eat for dinner, whats holding me back? Oh yah I live in the NW and this place is easy to come to after work. One day I will though!"							
3C8QQOM6JPHMYRTLRZDK6ZH5H3YILK	"Came for a bachelorette party dinner.  There was about 10 in our group and opted for the family style menu.  We chose the classic menu which came with a choice of 3 appetizer or salad, 4 main courses, and 2 desserts.  From what I remember, we had the calamari which was amazing, the bruschetta which was also amazing, and the maggiano's salad the salad was pretty good.  For our main courses, we had the chicken parm. I was not really a fan of this dish just because if was overly breaded.  We also had the peppercorn crusted sirloin.  This dish was really good. The meat was tender and the flavors were good.  Along with our meat dishes, we ordered baked ziti and fettuccine alfredo.  I enjoyed the baked ziti but the fettuccine alfredo was too much on the thick side where the noodles clump up together.  The dessert we chose are tiramisu and creme brulee both were yummy. The creme brulee was on the little runny side but it was a really good runny kind.  There were so much food that we even had tons for left overs.  Everyone enjoyed their food before food coma sets in.   The service was very very very good.  The host was able to hold our table even past the 15 min hold time because our party was so late.  Our wait staff was so friendly and soft spoken.  She was attentive but not annoying.  She approached our table frequently but not too frequent.  Drinks were refilled  before they  even reached half way.  Overall, it was a great experience.  I would recommend this place for big groups who has a budget because to be honest restaurants at Vegas can get super expensive and not everyone can afford them.  Would I come here again??? Of course!! I am actually planning on having my family  bday dinner at the one in LA."							
3BAKUKE49HSM1JS0OCPA0C9I6TCR1R	"Came here for a late Sunday lunch so it was not tough to get in, we just got sat right away.  For appetizers we were able to try the stuffed mushrooms, which were juicy and filled with breadcrumbs, spinach, and garlic. Not the best, but definitely good enough to eat a couple of!  For lunch I ordered the Chicken and Truffle Tortellaci. It was $14, large pieces of fresh looking  pasta stuffed with boiled, shredded chicken and some cheese. The sauce was a white wine cream sauce so it had some flavor. Didn't really pick up much on the truffle, but then again the asiago cheese could have interfered with that...There was also fresh chopped tomatoes that had a little flavor, and ""smoked Nueske ham"" which was chopped up also. Overall it was an enjoyable and safe lunch dish. Nothing revolutionary, but definitely a step above Olive garden.  I did also get to try the mushroom ravioli which had an excellent mushroom flavor-I'm betting some porcini even. The cream sauce was very mild and the ravioli was a nice texture. Nice veggie option.  Our server was very polite and informative, he kept our drinks filled and had our food coming out at the right times. He was lacking some finesse maybe but hey, what more can you ask for, it's Sunday afternoon probably right at shift change. I know how it goes man..."							
3VI0PC2ZAY0RU7LD3DTD1Q8E0L8OX8	"Came here for an early dinner around 5 pm.  we got seated within 2 minutes  drinks and appetizers came quick, we got the  margherita flatbread was good stuffed mushrooms eh was not good  The entrees were huge but took 35 minutes after appetizers to come out, at this point we were full and packed most of it to go.  baked rigatoni really SALTY!!! and i didnt like the paprika in my pasta shrimp fettecini alfredo nothing special linguine and clams was decent  The service was average.  I would come back and get outdoor seating and just order appetizers and drinks  im still looking for a good italian place in vegas"							
3J6BHNX0U983SMMU3FEBW707E2NKNZ	Came here for breakfast since we missed our breakfast meal period at our conference. I ordered a Sausage Egg McMuffin meal. It tasted delicious and not dry. They got our order correct the first time. Not a lot of seating though but we were lucky to get one.							
3538U0YQ1FAL8W16KL3Z7GAW1PFF3C	"Came here on a Wednesday night at ~7:45pm with a party of 8... the hostess estimated a wait time of about an hour and 45mins; however, we got lucky and got seated in 20mins because a larger party had just left.  Everything seemed to have gotten off to a good start. Once we were seated our server was super knowledgeable of the menu, which was great. Also he tailored the service to our party which had 3 kids, this was also great.  However there were certainly some service failures... we sipped on water for ~25 minutes (yes I timed it) before our actual drinks came in and he would literally ramble off every single ingredient in the specialty menu before letting us order, it was like he was reading a disclaimer off of one of those TV commercials.  I finally ended up ordering the Chicken Marsala and the Fettuccine Alfredo. The sauce on the chicken marsala  was creamy but watery and the mushrooms were soggy and looked like they had been left in the salamander for too long.   The Fettuccini was also a little tough and the Alfredo sauce had texture like mayo, not as creamy/runny as it should have been. It was chunkier than the marsala!  Overall, the atmosphere felt moderately upscale and the servers knowledge accompanied by the; however, for the price we paid the service and food quality did not meet my expectations. I would rate the atmosphere 4/5, the service 3/5, and the food quality 2/5  Tip: View is great, atmosphere is moderately upscale, and the service is adequate. If you're looking to impress a date this is a great spot. However if you're just looking for some great Italian food with your family or a large party this is not a good spot for the money.  Tip: Menu is small and it is periodically updated, something to keep in mind just in case you had a favorite."							
32TZXEA1OL0F0DQ2D0TXSJY8EFT41M	"Came here with a huge group of coworkers (20+). Pleasantly surprised.  We sat in the cavern - and we literally had the whole area to ourselves. Waitresses were pretty prompt with beer, drinks. Delivering food was a bit inconsistent, but the kitchen probably got slammed with our orders so I don't blame them. I just felt bad because one person had to wait a long time for some pulled pork.  Portions are huge and in the end the bill was pretty reasonable. It's a pretty cozy place with a decent menu that serves a variety of tastes. The burgers are good and there were folks who enjoyed fish 'n chips, pulled pork, and wiener schnitzel.   Would I come back otherwise? Probably not. But good for groups."							
39O6Z4JLX2DMKRUA4PFRWI2MWE4VXG	"Came here with some family who live locally for  some after-church breakfast recently.   IHOP's are pretty much the same all over, so I won't go into detail on what was ordered, but what  is worth mentioning is the service.  It sucked.  Our drinks took forever, it took way too long to place our order and it took even longer to get the food to the table. Apparently the waitress that we had that day was notorious for being sub-par. During a previous visit she had forgotten about the table all together.   At the end  of the day if you actually LIKE what  IHOP has to offer (mediocre food, atmosphere and service) than look no further. But should you happen to actually care about the the quality of  your experience, try the Omelet House."							
373L46LKP7M79WV9OHMJ30JQ5IJJKV	"Came in on a Saturday night.....crickets!! We were the only ones there. The door is off to the side so glad it was propped open as we wouldn't have know it was open. Music going immediately greeted by bartender. Ordered the pomegranate fizz something. It was awful. Pomegranate juice instead of syrup would have made all the difference I think. My husband wanted a beer, they only have one on tap and don't offer Dos Equis amber. Strange since there a Spanish bar. We also tried they sangria sunrise, that was tasty. The bartender was great and made lots of suggestions. We must have brought a good vibe because after about 15-20 of being there it started to fill up. All the while he was on point with everyone. We ordered a  Siracha chicken sandwich on their reverse happy hour menu. It was basically a chicken sandwich with siracha on it. it was gross. So the menu needs work but bartender was attentive and suggestive with out being pushy.    Also gaming machines all around the bar......way too many. I don't gamble so when there's a lot of machines it makes me feel like I'm taking up someone's spot. I think they could take out half of them and still have a great flow of gaming. I don't know if it's offered but maybe some live entertainment on the weekends. We in Summerlin love a spot we can lounge, eat and drink with live entertainment."							
3V8JSVE8YY6UILYYEVCJFSL9YPVYEJ	Came in with my co-workers a few times and had to write a review.  This place just blew me away.  The amount of good food you get for such a small price was shocking.  My order of Mongolian Beef was practically falling off the plate and after everything including tip I only forked up $10.  Place is quick as well which is a big plus for lunch hour plans.  Highly recommend this place for anyone working near the Capitol.							
3EKZL9T8Y82TZSOV842034Q3NH6HCB	"Came to First Watch after a bad experience with The good egg. 1000x better. Unlike other places, the food isn't greasy and doesn't give me a stomach ache afterwards. Lots of options and you can order breakfast or lunch any time of the day!  Our waitress told us: ""If we can do it,  we will"". She even let us order the Turkey Dill Crepegg even though it's not on the menu any more.  I will keep coming here! I recommend it any day. I'm just bummed they close at 2 30 :("							
3QREJ3J433DD4MJ9R2YWJFWI97OKLY	"Came to Vegas and had dinner here, there was no wait, the waiter had a sense of humor and always asked twice if we needed anything and if we were sure. I love love love Maggiano's!! Their pastas are to die for, espeically the Rigatoni ""D"" and Chicken Pesto Linguine.   The entire restaurant was a bit dark, but it sure did make dinner feel relaxing. I would recommend dressing business casual as this is on the Strip, and to bring an appetite as well. YUMMMM.  The breakdown: Food: A Atmosphere: A Service: A"							
33TGB4G0LPX77ZQLZUFCV0E1ZTOXT2	Can't go wrong with the Gyro Salad or the Picado Gyro!!							
35ZRNT9RUIEFE9EZJOMPUAJATQ73ON	"Can't say this is the most authentic Chinese fare around.  It is however, dependable and tasty.  The lunch menu comes out in a flash, (parking is horrible) but you can actually get in and out within 40 minutes if you have to.  Dinner again is good, nothing mind blowing but worth a try.  Get a mix of the regular dishes and then try out the less ordered stuff  (i.e. they actually do have a secret menu in Chinese, just point and order if you have to)"							
371Q3BEXDHPVXUDLBCY7IGYQ5A8SZ5	"China Chili is not only a 4, it is a very solid 4. I was on my way back to the West Valley, from the East Valley, and did a search on my beloved Yelp for a highly rated Chinese Food joint that was on the way. China Chili kept appearing. We called in the take out order, and it was finished before I arrived.   We ordered the House Chicken, Spicy Garlic Eggplant, Kung Pao Chicken, Mongolian Beef, and Fried Shrimp. And... BAM! It was bomb!  The House Chicken was delicious. Garlic-y, with little bit of spicyness to it, and a very subtle nuttyness to it from the oil in the wok. Great texture, great smell... It was fantastic.  I'm not an Eggplant fan, but my gf is, and she ordered it. She said the Eggplant was a 3.5. Good, but not the best she'd ever had.     The Kung Pao... Again, a very good dish. If there was a complaint, it was that it was a tad heavy on the zucchini in the dish, which was just a tad overcooked. It changed the texture in the dish in an obvious way.  Mongolian Beef. NOM NOM! Perfect. Great flavor, great texture. Very happy with the dish.   The Breaded Shrimp was perfect. I can only handle so much fried shrimp. Tried one, and it was spot on.   This was a perfect way to end a 15 hour day."							
3A520CCNWNGTM30VYPY3C632VYSAEL	"Classy Atmosphere and easy to get in.  I love the Veal Parm; expensive, but worth it.  If you have a bunch of friends come in from out of town, take them here and then go hit the casinos afterwards.  I got really lucky at the Venetian after a meal at this restaurant.  It's good luck ;-)"							
3D0LPO3EABFGUCBN89FFK4FN2R1YON	"Closes at 11:00PM on Saturday night. WTH? This is Las Vegas, for heaven's sake! We rolled in at about 10:52PM and were denied."							
3XD2A6FGFNAGR3V87E485SWXQ7J9S6	Convenient location in the casino. Slow service though and sirloin was not that good tonight- lined with a layer if tough fat. Used my entertainment book coupon so that helped and nice that you can charge to your room. We 'll be back but I'll order something different.							
3FI30CQHVKZUSYC8YLF1VTVVWIQB6X	"Dear Manager, It is a bad idea to argue in the foyer with a customer who is complaining about how long it took for their to go order. In addition, I suggest you find the source of the vomit-like smell that was the ultimate reason we didn't even wait to be seated."							
3MA5N0ATTCRTFGV8VG5YSQDY7ERKWQ	"DECENT LUNCH MENU. The interior is festive and well decorated. Its legit chinese.  My husband and I went here for a lunch date. The thing that was MOST impressive to me was the lighting-fast service. We both ordered from the lunch specials menu (which included and entree, rice, eggroll and hot & sour soup for about $7.50). As soon as we placed our order, the soup was at our table. Our drinks never ran low. Our main meal was out in about 5 minutes. It was FAST!   The meal itself was good (not SUPERB, but good.). I LOVED the hot & sour soup. I tried the lemon chicken dish and my husband got the orange chicken lunch dish (both good. i liked his orange chicken better). I wish that on the lunch menu they offered some side dishes. -- i would have enjoyed some veggies or tofu options. None of that is listed on the lunch menu. It seems like the dinner menu is a LOT more comprehensive and offers more family style service, but i wasn't sure if they only offered that menu in the evenings, or if you could order from the dinner menu any time.  Good for a relatively inexpensive lunch meal.  I would love to go back some time in the evening to experience the dinner menu. It looked like there were a lot of tasty dishes worth trying."							
31GN6YMHLP8R3Z8G0PE0JC48O84SWF	decided to go out for a late night dinner and ended up at tgi Fridays in the Orleans. Our server's name was Julie...I think. Gave us the WORST service ever. Looked like she was in hurry because she dropped off our and check at the same time. Like expected us to just eat and leave. So we tipped her the minimum of 15% because of her lack of service.							
32TZXEA1OL0F0DQ2D0TXSJY8EFT14J	"Decided to order a pizza for delivery and am happy to report that things have only gotten better since my first review from March 11, 2013.  Friendly service via phone, super fast delivery (less than 20 minutes), and a perfectly cooked pizza - the crust was IDEAL, the toppings were plentiful and delicious.  Verona - count yourselves lucky to have AJ's!"							
3HA5ODM5KA8EOA8BAF94XALUHZ2SV5	"Decided to try here with a friend for happy hour as it was the closest one to us. This TGIF is located inside the Orleans casino. The wait wasn't too long even though it seemed fairly busy. It was sad to hear they didn't participate in the $3 Thursday appetizer & drinks or 2 for $10 app n entree. They did have a happy hour that had different specials. $6 appetizers cept for seafood and samplers. $3-4 beers and well drinks, $5 sangrias and $6 ultimate drinks. We caught them near the end of their midday happy hour, no specials between 7-9pm. By the time my friend wanted to order a 2nd drink, our server informs us that happy hour had ended. Not that it was required, but most places I go for happy hour usually my server will be courteous enough to give a heads-up when happy hour's about to end so we can get our orders in. Maybe I'm spoiled? haha Food was ok, nothing amazing, nothing horrible for the most part. My friend's cheesecake apparently had been sitting out too long as the outside of it was pretty hard and dried. Next time I want happy hour at TGIFridays I might have to try another location and hope they participate in the good specials."							
3BDORL6HKKT6OM2Y49EUH8S9AQ4RCI	"Despite my previous experiences with Maggiano's in San Jose, I particularly enjoyed my Maggiano's experience in Las Vegas.  The bar here was just as high as my first experience back in San Jose.  We were here for my buddy's birthday and we had well over twenty people with us.  The staff pulled out all the stops to make sure we were well taken care of.  The food was like a flowing river of endless plates and our waiters did an excellent job of keeping us entertained.  Since Las Vegas has been a regular stop for my friends and I as of late, I would definitely come back here to re-live the experience.  Food recommendations: Everything!"							
3XDJY5RK5S1V9AH0FO3H3L35PCRU4C	"Dined here for a special event.. Our party were approached be a highly rude and inappropriate blond middle aged woman who, stated that our entire party would have to wait in the heat for 30min for a table when there were numerous free tables with no reservations. Both woman (hosts) were extremely rude and unaccommodating which baffled our party as this has been the worst service and experience we have encountered since arriving in the USA. Do not waste your time or money on such rude people as this has left a sour taste in our mouths."							
3OYHVNTV5TELA7M64UEOBW0C4CSKOE	"Dined: 4 / 1 / 2011 @ 10:33 pm  Ordered:  Long Island Ice Tea  Mango Mai Tai  Nachos      This T.G.I.Friday's is located inside the Orleans.  I came with my girlfriend and her brother.  Upon arrival there was no one in line.  I approached the hostess and she told me there would be a 10 minute wait if we wanted to have happy hour at the bar.  I gave her a confused looked as I glanced over to my right and saw 3 tabletops in the bar that were empty and prepped for the next guest.  I told her okay and sat on the 1 bench that they had for those who were waiting to be seated.  While waiting a couple came and was sat immediately in the regular dining area.  5 minutes after the couple's arrival, another group of 4 was sat immediately.  At this point, I was getting a little frustrated and just kept staring at the Hostess.  She stood there with two other hostess just talking amongst themselves.  She finally decided to seat us after  nearly useless minutes of wasting.  Within those 10 minutes, not one person left or entered the bar; so I have no clue what the wait was all about.      We mainly came here for a late night snack and enjoy some happy hour drinks.  Luckily our waitress was really nice and serviced us immediately.  She was very bubbly and had lots of energy.  If it wasn't for her, I would have definitely rated this place a 2 star.  The food was good and the happy hour prices were phenomenal.    Pros: * conveniently located inside Orleans (movies, bowling, dining, food under one roof) * Open late and TVs throughout the bar  * Quick service (at the bar)  Cons: * Horrible service at the hostess stand  * Unprofessional demeanor at the hostess stand. * Difficult parking  Tips:   * Ask to just sit at the Bar itself (not a table in the bar area) for faster      seating. * Sign up for their email list to receive points for future discounts and also receive a free appetizer via email confirmation message.  I wouldn't go out of my way to come here again, but since the location is pretty convenient; I'll be fair and recommend this place to those who are not in favor or driving around kill the night.  This is a one stop shop and has numerous entertaining amenities to keep you busy and complete the night with cheap drinks/ cheap eats."							
3KLL7H3EGDHPY1UVZLX5TWES8OLVHN	"Dinner after our movie date night! It was a clean setup and friendly service. We got seats in a timely manner. Our waitress was funny and gave great dessert suggestions so I truly appreciated that.  I wasn't too happy at the end of the meal when I saw the bill. Not because I was charged for something I didn't get but because for the amount we paid we could've gotten the French market buffet next door all day pass. I got ribs and lobster so the prices seemed appropriate. However, after it was time to pay one tends to correlate the price you pay to the satisfaction one feels. And I didn't feel fully satisfied. The food was good but not $60 good. The only thing I really enjoyed was the Oreo ice cream pie dessert. If it hadn't been for that I would've probably given a 1 star review. Also like I said, my server was nice so luckily for TGIF it was fine there too.  But from now on I will probably go there just for that dessert, nothing else there is worth that kind of money."							
3GONHBMNHVESZZ0GRF2L67ZKDLRZM1	"Dinner here was awesome. The ambiance , the service, and most of all the food and wine. Just excellent! Portions are def well portioned for the price and the prices are a deal when it comes to [portion and most of all taste! The fresh bread they bring out is also a winner! Try not to over eat on the bread and salad though because the dish itself you need to save room for and also the desert!  The pasta list also gives you options for gluten free or wheat as well for those who prefer. They also have a great alcohol selection and assist you in helping find a wine that best fits your meal that night. Definitely a great spot to eat and you can park inside of fashion show mall so there is a ton of parking!"							
3M4KL7H8KV3TF0UGWOMCPHIMA6Z164	"Disappointed !!!  Went to try Paella - not good at all.  Just wonder if the chef  is from colombia  had a authentic Paella from Spain,  I guess not :(  Not going back and will keep trying other restaurants until I find the real Paella"							
38EHZ67RIM8S8I5B1NEWL0JE2VXMGZ	"Disclaimer: The only time I come here is for large birthday gatherings featuring: (1) the extremely young; and (2) the extremely old.  I've never independently chosen to eat here.  I will say they have their sh$t together when it comes to large private gatherings.  They're always well staffed and organized, unlike other spots in town (*cough* PJ Clarkes *cough*).  The private rooms are also spacious and feature large windows -- you're not in some afterthought back room.  Further, the portions they provide for groups are enormous.  Even if there are 10 people at a table, it never runs out.  In fact, I usually get stuck with taking home leftovers.  Just what I always wanted, 4 lbs of artichoke dip......  BUT, large portions aren't really a godsend if the food is just meh.  I've had the chicken & eggplant parmesan, chicken piccata, penne with meat sauce, spagetti, caesar salad, stuffed mushrooms, calamari, profiteroles and...... none of it was memorable.   Overall, they serve up very basic Italian food meant to please the masses......something easily achieved when the patrons are seven-years-old....."							
3RDTX9JRTYHU85BGJB6XA1013T797K	"DO NOT GO HERE!  Brought to you by the same lousy management and food purveyors as John Cutter.  Lousy food, I am surprised I did not get sick from the fish.  Tiny portions and very little flavor.  Also, be careful when you write a bad review about any of the lousy Corrigan restaurants because you will get a petty little note from the owner - ""Adam C"".  Here's an idea: if you have bad reviews and poor feedback from guests - invest your time and energy into listening and making changes instead of striking back.  If anyone else gets these messages, make sure to avoid their other restaurants: John Cutter and Sedona."							
3YGYP13641PPFQZPTZN8XJML9UHNRV	"Do not pass go, do not collect $200.....go DIRECTLY to Maggiano's!  I had read the reviews about Maggiano's catering to their gluten free patrons and looked forward to our visit.  We were not disappointed.  I asked about a gluten free menu and the waiter told us they didn't have a menu, but almost anything on the menu could be made gluten free.  They even offered to coat the chicken in potato chips and pan fry it if I wanted chicken parmesan.  Someone pinch me, I must be dreaming.  To make our visit even better we happened to come during happy hour when their signature cocktails were only $6.  YES PLEASE!  I ended up ordering the lobster carbonara and hubby ordered veal parmesan.  All I can say is WOW.  My meal was BEYOND fantastic.  I fully expected tiny pieces of lobster and was astounded when my plate arrived and there were large chunks of lobster.  Both meals were enough for two so we gladly took our leftovers back to our room and had them for lunch the next day.  Hubby's grandmother came straight from Italy and trust me, these meals rivaled hers.  My only disappointment is we don't have a Maggiano's where we live.  Seriously, it was THAT good."							
3L1EFR8WWTL7NYQM1U49YTDI1HP9FN	"Don't judge a book by its cover, considering this is in Papago Plaza. Mikas Greek is very nice inside, with a modern twist. The food is always fresh and the customer service is on point."							
3HEM8MA6H9SP6AW2WZB0WIHBDNGQPT	Don't need to try Food is ok not too special A little pricey for its value							
3KWGG5KP6JIFR6P6Z1IDV9YZ434CME	Don't really recommend the bacon wrapped dates a title to dry not a lot of flavor.  The garlic shrimp where perfect and the ahi tasted as if it were spam put of a can. I was a little disappointed with the Ahi because it's usually my fav were ever we go. We tried the strawberry bajito yum-o. Bartender took along time Malone drinks and there was maybe only four of us in the whole restraint.							
335HHSX8CDL34KU980XBNA8L8HIHDB	"Eating here created wonderful memories...from the amazing food, excellent service and romantic violinist , we had an evening to remember."							
3QO7EE372O3N2GVSDUTZ1YCMWJ1QB8	"Every chance I get to eat here, I do.  I wish there was one in Tucson.  I order the same thing everytime.  I love the Killer Cajun."							
3HEADTGN2P82NV8YVQ9Z70GYVXJVRK	Every weekend I come to First Watch and the service is always outstanding. I usually have one of two regular waitresses and they are always so nice and cheerful. The food is always good and quickly served. If you want a decent breakfast in a nice happy environment then go here.							
36QZ6V1589TEBVJB5PZZ1OJB3STSUG	Everything was wonderful from the food to the waitstaff!   Everyone's food was fresh and delicious. I'd certainly eat here again!							
3ZQA3IO31B7J460KWK866H4DV6SO1F	Everytime I am in Las Vegas I would go to Maggiano's.  Everything is great and when my wife and I are there for a Marathon we eat pasta.							
3E6L1VR4XW2K5FOO3N1XEJMGBGHF6I	"Excellent food and atmosphere. TOURISTS:  if you have leftover food, take it with u and walk to the nearest pedestrian bridge and give it to one of the many homeless there."							
32CAVSKPCE5EHBKHS6KF5NW2DSH1U6	Excellent food and service. The pablano salsa was amazing! I highly recommend the lemon cilantro rice and black beans for your sides.							
3TFJJUELSH5PK2LDPJZTG0K1YYOC2O	Excellent food for the price and our waiter Ryan was Awesome! Very friendly and great service. Recommend for Italian food and drinks. A winner and ask for Ryan!							
3XU9MCX6VOSTQ4AW7GPO5VJNYZQR28	Excellent food! Never had a bad meal or service here. I always get the take home classic pasta							
37SOB9Z0SSD78OB26W6X2TFGYL1L3N	"excellent Italian dining in Vegas. They have some great pasta and chicken dishes and a decent selection of wines, but an ok selection of desserts. We went here about 3 years ago and wanted a nice dinner after watching ""KA"" and it was a nice walk to get there and we only waited about 20 mins. We got seats near the window with a wonderful view of the Vegas strip. If you're gonna compare chain Italian restaurants, ""Maggiano's"" little Italy is much better than ""Olive Garden"". I recommend going here to finish off a nice romantic night in Vegas."							
3XUSYT70ITHSTKODASQQHI94M0FD04	"Excellent service, you are always greeted at the door and never have to ask to a refill. Great Chinese food in general, comes out quick for those in a hurry. Also, I am more willing to drive across town just for their boiled wonton spicy peanut soup - phenomenal"							
35O6H0UNLSW4RDA6HUID1B088SOJ5A	Excellent.  Clean great place and great food							
3DWNFENNE3BMVU663PZ3WJUU8WT4JQ	"Extremely overrated and not impressive, at all.   I went here for a business lunch and I arrived a bit early. The hostesses were very rude, rather than nicely say we're not open yet, they had an attitude that was like go the **** away. Not a good start.   When I finally get in I head to the back where yes, they have a screen setup and a sound system. But the projector is being leveled by paper towels and was amateurish at best. And the room we were in needed paint. Seriously, when you take a look around the podium was chipped, the walls had chips, and I'm thinking for a place overlooking Las Vegas Blvd that the experience was downgraded. It may have been classy a while back, but the management team needs to consider investing in a little bit of paint.   Then we get to the wobbly tables, and the family style food that was brought out. Family style might work in Italy but this is America, and to me family style is a masquerade for a kitchen that is too slow or chokes at cranking out high volume high quality plates. In this case about the only thing good was the Caesar salad as it's hard to muck up a Caesar salad. But the rest of the food? Truly unmemorable. If I was a tourist and I walked in expecting the place to live up even partially to it's ""Little Italy"" name I would have felt like I was the victim of a mafia shakedown.   Long story short Yelp may have this place ranked at 4 Stars, but there's not enough wine in Italy that could make me intoxicated enough to give it anything over 2. And that's only because I'm trying to be diplomatic about it. Needless to say if it wasn't for business functions I won't be back.   (Note to staff: It takes money to make money. Investing in simple, functional equipment and PAINT is a start. Next, they're called SPICES. Surely in the recipes that are used there's a line or two for various spices. Your food was barely 1 notch above cafeteria food, no wait, I think a high school aged line cook at Golden Corral in Amarillo Texas could prepare better food than what I had.)  You should be ashamed to slap the word ""Italy"" anywhere near your doors. I better stop typing before I end up clicking on just one star instead of two."							
3XAOZ9UYRZ7MPID0BX0AVMZDA7AQ1P	"Fair is fair, I wrote a terrible review for a Chinese restaurant last week, Now for something completely different...we were in Phoenix on a visit, and after last week's disaster at the Chinese buffet where the food was cold, tough, and tasteless, I figured we couldn't do worse...Yelp helped me find China Chili; with 154 reviews and almost all of them 4 or 5 stars, I figured it was our very best shot at a decent meal.  My standards for Chinese food are very high as I lived in San Francisco for 20 years and have been to China for the real thing; so don't take my 3 star rating as disrespect. It's really quite good, certainly the best Chinese I've had since I left San Francisco.   Dcor usually isn't an important part of the experience for me but China Chili is quite attractive inside, it looks small from the outside but was quite spacious inside. Despite being one very large room it was possible to have a quiet conversation. The lighting is quite relaxing without being dim,  and the dcor traditional Chinese.  We had Hot & Sour soup, and were asked if we wanted it spicy; we did; it was. Really quite excellent, among the best Hot & Sour I've had. Very rich and full, I was surprised at the shrimp and chicken, which were perfect in texture and taste; the veggies were just the right crispness, the broth was spicy but not too hot, and all in all I really recommend this soup; my companion said it was his favorite part of the meal. He's from rural North Carolina and had never had it before, nor much Chinese. As for me, I'd come back for more.  Next up the Kung Pao Chicken was little disappointing, in that it had too little chicken, too much okra. But it's a minor point, the flavor was delicate and pleasant, the mix of other vegetables offset the okra and what chicken there was, was nice. Unfortunately it was not very spicy, especially after the soup, and so if you order it I suggest you ask for it to be extra spicy. But still a pretty decent dish.  My personal favorite of the meal was the Prawns in Lobster Sauce with black beans. Perhaps a little salty but the flavors overall were delicate, the prawns large, tender, and juicy and no hint of greasiness.  Last we had house special fried rice which was excellent, very fluffy and well seasoned, with beef, chicken, scallops and shrimp. Quite gingery which I like.   All in all, while it's not up with the very best Chinese cuisine in San Francisco, the food and service were more than acceptable, prompt, unobtrusive, helpful and the price very reasonable, $40 for four dishes and sodas including tax; and the portions were more than generous, we took home more food than we ate (by intention). The Soup alone could have been half the meal...  If you're in Phoenix and you want Chinese, you couldn't go far wrong by choosing China Chile."							
3C8QQOM6JPHMYRTLRZDK6ZH5H3YLIN	"Family style is the way to go if at all possible when visiting here. Doing this for lunch, however, does have its down side. You will have left overs. Be prepared to take something home and enjoy it the next day.  The place is huge and though I am sure it gets crowded we were able to be seated outside in great weather without reservations on a Sunday slightly earlier than the lunch hour in March."							
356TQKY9XFDUU0S6EJ0JA55QJNP78T	"Fantastic food!  Loved that yelp helped us get a reservation at the time we wanted, walked right in and they were ready for us.  I had the Chicken Caprese, a special of the day, and it was amazing!!   I second the hit-and-miss service--we had to ask for more water, and for our check.  They were busy, but found that annoying.  The mints are yummy--take a few! : )  Despite service issues, I would definitely return and highly recommend!"							
34R0BODSP1FWGXOE3T7M4VNG3KSE5K	Fantastic!!!!!  Grilled chicken pitta and gyro picante ordered with salads absolutely great loads of flavor great portion size and great value. Defiantly become a regular haunt. Staff were so helpful and happy great to chat with while waiting for the awesome food							
3KTCJ4SCVGHV43F8J4TTEDF806EM1Z	"First let me say I really enjoy the food and atmosphere at Maggianos.  We go there often, but unfortunately, I can't say the same for their Thanksgiving Dinner menu.  We made reservations for 5:00 pm (a month ago) at their Las Vegas location and they did not seat us until 6:15 pm.  I was not happy, but really try to make the best of this special day.  Waiter was overworked, came to our table maybe three times.  I felt like the whole thing was a big rush, did not enjoy at all.  Could have stayed home, cooked and saved the money we spent.  I will go back, but not on any major holidays.  Oh yeah last but not least THE FOOD was mediocre!  I know, I can't believe it!  The best part of that night was leaving.  That comment was from my 7 yo son.  Lol"							
3W9XHF7WGKB1NZRE0B0N566Z3K9KT0	"First of all, I'm a major YELP user, and like most of you on here, I look at Yelp for food recommendations; however, I am a terrible Yelper and never actually post anything on here. This place was so bad, that I actually had to find time to post something to inform the public on how terrible this place is!  Coming home from Red Rock Canyon, we (party of 4) decided to give this place a try.  The hostesses seemed lost when I requested a table for four. She just walked in a circle around the restaurant before going back to the front to ask another hostess for help on where to seat us ?!    We ordered the mussels, which were super tiny and came with half of them still closed. Why would you serve totally closed mussels to your patrons?  The dates, at a whopping $6 for three, don't even have a nut in the middle like Firefly giving them no texture.  The sangria was good, however, it was overloaded with ice in an attempt to minimize alcohol content and maximize volume with ice.  The bruschetta with ham (NOT PROSCIUTTO AS IT SHOULD BE) was good, but for 7-8$ for two tiny pieces, it was way overpriced.  We also ordered Scallops, Sausage, and another item which we cancelled because we just wanted to leave and find another place to eat.  Basically, everything is so overpriced that you will spend 40$ per person and leave totally hungry.  The quality of the shrimp, mussels, and other meats is so poor and tiny that it seems that the owners are simply taking advantage of the ""Summerlin Area"" by charging such high prices for such low quality.  Finally, this ""Tapas Restaurant"" actually has gaming machines and huge flat screen TV's all over it with football playing loudly on all screens making this a hyped-up PT's rather than a Spanish-feeling restaurant.   Stick with Barcelona, Firefly, or another tapas restaurant if you want to leave full and satisfied, not hungry and ripped-off."							
3B9XR6P1WEB6GTRFI49Q4X00IOAJBB	"First time at Maggiano's and Ill definitely be back! I had the skirt steak with green peppercorns for lunch and it was great!! Fries needed some work, hence the 4/5. Server was very sweet and attentive. I will definitely be back!!"							
3EKZL9T8Y82TZSOV842034Q3NH6CH6	"First time here last night and had a great experience! Our server did a fantastic job in my opinion she was very attentive and personable.  She wasn't overly formal which is a weird pet peeve of mine. Our waters were always full, drinks refilled and table clean.    Onto the food. We started with the zucchini appetizer which was all kinds of amazing! They were lightly dusted with parmesan cheese and served with a lemon aioli of some sort. Very delicious. My boyfriend thought they had a little too much batter, but I thought they were perfect. We asked for a side of marinara or meat sauce with the app and our server gladly brought us a little of both. They too were very good! Very different from each other which I thought was nice.  I ordered the Chicken Francese, I think that's how it's spelled, with angel hair pasta instead of the potatoes. It was a lemon chicken with a parmesan crust and what I would describe as a light creamy mushroom sauce. Idk but it was good! Not too lemony or heavy on the sauce and the perfect portion. I saved one chicken breast to take home because I wanted some later.  My boyfriend ordered the rigatoni d which he was really disappointed with.  It had an odd sweet flavor to it. We took most of it home with us and never touched it after that.   Overall it was a good experience! I definitely will be back to try something new!"							
3IH9TRB0FBF98KPHYPV1MK8RJXTI1E	"First time here! The owner Adam greeted us when we got here. The hospitality was great, classic rock music was very enjoyable and we loved the atmosphere. We will definitely be back!!"							
34OWYT6U3WXRXPSC22AU1QQAH9H9IE	First time visit. Great view of strip at table. Wonderful atmosphere. Great food. Good prices. Great service.							
31N9JPQXIPYCQWLMXUBEJFKFMLJNHY	"First Watch is a local chain that serves up average breakfast food. This place isn't terrible, but it is also not remarkable in any way.  The booths are made of slotted wood, and for some reason they haven't been updated in years, resulting in sub-par seating that will leave horizontal lines on anyone wearing shorts.  The food is ok, not exciting or great, just ok. The coffee is bad, it looks like coffee but tastes like brown water. Additionally they don't have fresh half&half, they have the little individual cups similar to Circle K.  For this visit, the HUGE downfall was the service. I won't describe this person because I don't want any harm coming to her job, but if our server wasn't on meth, then I don't like cupcakes (HINT- I love cupcakes). The server was jittery, confused and racing around unnecessarily. Making things more annoying, the booth near us apparently had some of the servers friends dining, and they were so loud, I thought I was at a club. When we were seated the server yelled over to us asking us for a drink order. For the next ten minutes she sat with her pals and cackled about something they were watching on a smart phone.  It was sketchy too because they started talking pretty loudly about sex acts, and other things that aren't the best fit when there are tables of kids within five feet. I have a great sense of humor, but 11:00am on a Saturday isn't the best time to get cheeky at breakfast. In a different restaurant, they might politely ask the people who are yelling loudly and having inappropriate conversations to dial it down, but here the server was sitting with them, and was part of it.  Interestingly, all the other staff we encountered were very nice and appropriate, but our server was SO poor, that it just couldn't save the outing. Our food was brought to us by a lovely server who we wished would have been ours from the start. After our food was brought out, our server never stopped by again. It was funny however, that she had to walk by our table five times to go back and sit with her friends, and cackle some more- but couldn't stop to see if we needed more water (yes) Luckily my dining pal has a sense of humor and just rolled her eyes, but I would be livid if I brought my Mom, etc. there.  In closing, I cannot recommend this place for a meal. It's not terrible, but with the economy being so sketchy, it's nice to spend money somewhere that is comfortable and where you're not ignored, or served by someone who likely cannot pass a drug test."							
35F6NGNVM8ZDSKKUHHBE111DX09T73	"First Watch is a UPGRADE Breakfast, Bunch and lunch everything tastes GOOD fresh and HOT and it's not loud and uncomfortable, waitress are all nice and polite and happy serve you with smile, not like DENNY's on 7th St Camelback or IHop on Central Phoenix . Even BETTER than MATT'S BIG BREAKFAST downtown Phoenix, no hard uncomfortable chairs to sit in while your being rush.  Finally find a descent place :-) ."							
3JHB4BPSFKP4ENGVFAF3ASHW8JYQ9Y	"First Watch is always a reliable place to hit after a night of binging or a moderate bout of dysentery, as you can always expect the food to be bland but healthful.  Barely anything on the menu is slathered in grease, which is a nice change from some of FW's competitors.  I'm not totally slamming the place: I actually like the combos they offer in terms of the sweet-savory equilibrium that's so important to me when breakfast is concerned.  The retirement home-style pastels are soothing, too.  You might expect Dorothy, Rose, and Blanche to sit down in the booth next to you at any moment.  A big FW plus is that generous seating ensures that there are barely any times when you have to wait to be seated for breakfast or lunch.  So if you can't get a seat at nearby Matt's Big Breakfast or the Park Central Good Egg, consider this egg joint."							
3GV1I4SEO95657YKPY4V9WR08C46LF	First Watch is good for a light breakfast as they really don't pile on the food.  The food is good though and the service is good too.							
3TTPFEFXCT04JBFUYDPXH4YTRVVH6J	"First Watch offers the standard American breakfasts.  It's good stuff.  What I noticed about this restaurant is the consumer service.  Albert's customer service skills are second to none.  Dude asked me what my name was, shook my hand and referred to me by my first name every time he came by to see how I was doing.  I recommend this restaurant."							
3J06WJ78HN0UG2PF4AE98X51G3WVVD	"First Watch used to have great service and great food.  Over the years, they've gone to the other side.  Of the last 5 visits to this location, they've managed to completely screw  up the food and give me terrible service every time.    This morning, they served me ""poached"" eggs that were raw and slimy, the Avocado was dark brown and my $2 iced tea got 1 refill.  I sent the food back and we got nothing but attitude the rest of the time we were there.    After minimal deliberation at the table, we decided that we were not going to return for our weekly Sunday breakfast.  *********UPDATE************ *********10/07/07************ After going by Matt's Big Breakfast and seeing about 20 people waiting outside the door, we opted for something a little easier to get in to.  Unfortunately, at 7:30am on a Sat. morning, there is little choice.  We regrettably went to First Watch and not much has changed.  As soon as you walked in the door you were greeted by surly staff.  I can say one positive thing though.  After swearing off their Eggs Benedict, I chose a the dill, spinach and ham crepe smothered in Hollandaise sauce.  All the best of the eggs Benedict without the poached eggs that somebody cooked wrong. YUM-O.  If I do go back there again, I know what I'll be getting.  I upped them one star for the food."							
3HFWPF5AK9ZUC16SQ53YEFTBQFA3SK	"First, the good part: waiter and manager were very receptive and friendly and tried their best to help. Also, decor and space is fine-- clean and open, what you expect from an upscale chain.   The bad part: the salads we ordered looked like a pre-made salad that you can buy in a bag at the supermarket. The first time it came out there were wilted pieces and they forgot to add the chicken. They were very apologetic and brought out new salads. This time they came out without wilted leaves, but still the produce was as dry and brittle as the first time. The chicken was also overcooked, dry. Maybe I wouldn't mind so much if it wasn't a $13 salad. I didn't expect anything fancy, but I do want carefully prepared and fresh food.   We then wondered if maybe it wasn't the fault of the restaurant, but of their food suppliers--the cost of being a chain restaurant. But then we went across to the street to the Wynn and had a delicious, vibrant, salad.   So though I appreciate Maggiano's eager and friendly service and pleasant decor, I think they would do better to focus on the quality of their food."							
39WICJI5AT8RDDS6LXX6A8QEDUA3ZP	Five stars because the food just tastes amazing. Must have a secret recipe for the funny face pancake.							
3K3G488TR2OLD0EJCK2MYCCUMNFQ57	Food exceeded expectations. Waitress was quietly attentive. We are discerning Chinese diners and will definitely come back.  Spicy Hunan Tofu very nice!							
3IJ95K7NDXSYQ0QBDOTWYF8E7L6NGZ	"Food is great. Service has always been slow...even when the restaurant is not busy. Haven't been back in months.  however, the last 2 times i have gone, the service has been much quicker so i increase from 3 stars to 4!  and downtown location is across the street from golds gym downtown so i may frequent much more."							
3BKZLF990ZFJFOO3NM7J99ANHSJQYN	"Food is really good, price is very reasonable for that quality and quantity.  The chicken pesto and bruschetta were delicious. It wasn't too heavy like other Italian restaurant that I've tried.  Service is great, and the atmosphere is good too. I love the booth, it's very comfortable. The only reason why I didn't give this place a 5 star is because I was a little disappointed at the cleaniness of this place the second time I went there. I figured there was a kid sitting in our booth before us and the floor and seats were full of crumbs and very dirty. Seriously? the booster seat was still under the table... Other than that, this place is very good, definitely worth a try."							
3BS6ERDL93NN7VASCH67QJJVZ326DZ	"Food is very tasty. I loved the oxtail and the crabbed stuffed peppers. I gave them five stars because the atmosphere, service and food were all pretty good and they just opend so it should only get better! It is a little spendy but that's always what i expect from the Summerlin area. The food is well worth it though and I'll definitely be going back soon."							
3EGKVCRQFW8WBIME44ATEKFOVSJBYX	"Food was great, however the practice of adding dollars to the credit card bill is not something I appreciate.   My total was 19.40, I noted down 23 on the receipt and somehow I got charged 24.40. Italian mob procedure, eh?"							
3NKW03WTLMNFQJT38LPVOCP76KJQWO	"Food was great; staffs are friendly, very pleasant ambiance. Our banquet managers Beth and Sabrina helped us on planning the event -We were 300++ miles away from them, and I didn't have a problem communicating w/ them - they will always respond to my questions (email) about the event planning.  They allow us to bring our own microphone, centerpcs and even decorations :) to complete the picture! 4 stars because we only have 1 staff (Javier) helping us - he is very courteous and gracious to attend all our demands, however, it always took him time to come and serve another guest.. Mr. friendly - Manager came to the rescue - apologize and make it up with us :) ..--  Bit of advice - the patio -is a little loud so if you are planning to have a solemn or event that needs a quiet environment you should choose their indoor banquets.   Overall, salute to Maggiano's - for making our wedding reception, a memorable one.."							
385MDVINFCVY4WPQDV5MRBDLSPRWJ3	"food was ok, ambiance- way too noisy! sitting on top of one another, ok , if you like that kind of seating- major annoyance, ordered the bottle of wine and expected to receive carafe at end of evening- was told, we didn't order enough so we'll mail it to you later- don't really expect to see it ever"							
32FESTC2NH6Y4EUF839ZMJFTHP7CU6	"Food was OK. $16 for nachos with beef added is pricey in my opinion, definitely take advantage of the Groupon. Never been to a bar that didn't make strawberry margaritas, and never been told ""we don't make frozen margaritas!"" $9+ for a drink and you can't crush ice in the blender? Won't be going back."							
3Z33IC0JC02WJVCC199DGFG4PBDV9X	"Food was very good, tried the gyro picado '& a pleasant spice to the meat."							
3KA7IJSNW6L224UDDHEA1TMCRNGBP3	Food was very good! I had chicken piccata and hubby had stuffed shells from their holiday menu. The stuffed shells were to die for! Had a frozen Bellini which I would recommend! Will go back next time we visit Vegas!							
33N1S8XHHM1V3AERYTJNMFBHFAVZ1S	"Food: Food here was excellent. I had the chicken parmigiana which also came with a side of spaghetti or fettuccine . The spaghetti was delicious and the chicken was also very tasty and moist. Portions were huge,especially for lunch time!  Price: Prices are modercheap! why go to an expensive Italian place on the strip when you can dine here for half the price and get good quality food!  Atmosphere: I liked dining here. It was quiet, relaxing and great for groups or family dining.  Service: Service was great. Our waitress was very friendly and attentive.  Our water glasses were always refilled.   Location: Located in Fashion Show Mall on the second floor. Great to dine after/before shopping!"							
33KMQD9OFJUQUMNN4E8DW59V83J776	"For a great Italian meal and an affordable price on the strip, this is the place.  I have come here for a meal every time I am in Vegas for something a little more affordable.  The great thing is the quality of food and service makes you not miss the pricey hotel restaurants.  On my most recent trip, my wife and I made reservations early afternoon for that night.  Our past couple of visits without reservations we had to wait for a table once we got to the restaurant.  This time we were seated right away.  The restaurant was busy for a Tuesday night, but not as busy as we had seen it before.  My wife got the Chicken Parmesan, which is a classic and delicious. I got the mushroom ravioli, which were also quite delicious.  The service was exceptional.  Our food arrived quickly and our waiter was friendly and helpful.  For me, this place is a must on every trip to Vegas."							
3VJ4PFXFJ3NABZXHOPD8GOP5HMNUAN	"For finer dining in Las Vegas, my wife and I typically like going to Mon Ami Gabi at the Paris, which is excellent. Of course, we can't possibly eat there all the time, so during our last Las Vegas trip we also tried Maggiano's Little Italy. I understand this is a national chain (one which I wasn't aware of at all up until now), but if you didn't know that you would assume this was a single independently owned restaurant. The atmosphere is very nice, but not pretentious. Service was rapid and very personable. Like many Italian restaurants, especially on the strip in Vegas, this place is fairly expensive, but if you do not go crazy on drinks and appetizers there are several reasonably priced entrees on the menu. Our bill with tip was under $35, which is very reasonable for the large portions we received, as well as the quality of food and service we experienced. We experienced no real negatives, and the view outside of the Vegas strip while we were dining indoors was spectacular. They also have outdoor seating, though it is limited in the number of available tables. One minor complaint is that they could turn down the air conditioning a notch, but that is a common complaint anywhere indoors in Vegas, not limited solely to this restaurant. We've experienced much colder air conditioning elsewhere in Vegas. They also did not serve butter with there bread, but brought us some butter promptly when we asked for it. Their to-go boxes are of high quality and very usable aluminum. Portion sizes were large enough for us to have leftovers we ended up taking with us on our flight back home. My daughter ended up eating that, and she was very impressed - even though the food had just been reheated in a microwave, instead of more properly in an oven. For the price, this is a well located and enjoyable Italian restaurant. It is well worth checking out in comparison to some of the more outrageously priced (for Arab sheiks?) Italian restaurants on the strip."							
329E6HTMSWIWOITKLWUWNT219LXK3K	"For my mother-in-law's birthday last weekend, my husband planned a big surprise birthday party for her at Maggiano's, which is an old favorite haunt of his.  Maggiano's exterior is nothing spectacular considering they're stuck on the second floor of a mall, but once you step out of the elevator you're transported.  Giant crystal chandeliers line the majestic hallways as you pass through the entryway and multiple private dining areas lined with dark wood.  The bar area is dark paneled, well-staffed, and tucked far in the busy back / main dining room.  It was packed when we arrived, but we found seats and ordered cocktails quite easily (though we heard there was a one-hour wait for tables for those without reservations).  When our table for 10 was ready we headed over to a corner lot where our group gathered.  It wasn't particularly easy to navigate the space in which they'd placed our party, as they've crammed as many tables in the room as they can and we were situated up against six booths. However, the waiters were quite patient practicing a constant ballet / battle with us while we hugged one another and took photographs (or they just went around the other way).  The ambiance inside Maggiano's was so dark, warm, and cozy that I was expecting more from the food.  The calamari that someone ordered as an appetizer was boring, bland, and uninspired.  The spinach salad I ordered was GIANT and tasty; however, I wished I'd stopped there.  Unfortunately my huge vat of gnocci was equally bland and mediocre, and the bread on the tables was stale/hard.  It was so loud and busy in the restaurant (and I was drunk, which I'll get to in a minute) that I didn't even think to ask to try GT's entree (linguini and clams in red sauce) which he said was a good thing, because he hated it (and said that the food was much better a few years ago).  The adorable accordian player was a wonderful touch; he played some of our requests at one end of the table (although it was so loud in the restaurant that those on the other end couldn't hear).  Throughout our meal I was shocked that I wasn't drinking my wine; every time I turned to look at my glass I could swear it looked as if I hadn't touched it.  Turns out that the stealth waiters were just constantly topping it off, which unfortunately resulted in a disequilibrium in the brain of yours truly, and my evening ended with me trying to get my mother in law to take us to a strip club and arguing with GT's uncle (who'd flown in from Oahu for the occasion) about whether or not boys are hornier than girls.  BAD, SELF, BAD!  Perhaps a waiter asking a gal every now and again if she'd like more wine would help a hypothetically drunk girl manage her evening in a slightly more classy manner.  My main gripe, however, was that GT and I had made cupcakes for dessert that spelled out ""OH, SHIT, SHE'S 70!"" when all lined up properly.  But we brought them in our cupcake pan and the waiter brought them out in the same pan we'd brought them in (though we'd asked that they be put on a large plate).  As a result, they read ""OHSH   ITSH  ES70!""  Also, although the kind/patient waiter did light the candles for us, I got the impression that the staff just wrote us off at the end, or perhaps someone in the back was a little ticked off with us for bringing our own dessert.  Regardless of the reason, I thought it very odd that they didn't bring us plates or forks with dessert - we had to hunch over the table and eat cupcakes over the tiny cupcake wrappers, carefully trying not to spill crumbs everywhere, which is not so easy to do when you're drunk on Maggiono's bottomless glass of wine."							
3T5ZXGO9DE4JKEY8J892NGJPNMOZQO	"For over six years now, whenever my wife and I go to Vegas, this place has been a favorite. I love the gnocchi and Italian sausage, but haven't had anything I didn't like.   Picture this: last night; Monday night; in Vegas again on business; four of us looking for a good meal; walk up to the counter and they are telling everyone it's an hour and a half wait; good thing I had a reservation. We were seated in minutes, 8:06 to be exact. Not bad for an 8:00 reservation.   It was all good, as always. The service and especially the food!"							
3LN50BUKPVREFDGP4U34FWIH3HULP0	"For the last six months I have been intrigued by this little building with a sign reading ""Coming soon Caldero.""  Needless to say I wanted to see if this was just another simple Mexican Restaurant or something more.  After tonight I definitely believe it to be the ladder.  My wife and I had the Mole with Chicken and the Pork stuffed Poblano and I couldn't be happier.  I am excited knowing that this is within walking distance, but I encourage all of you to drive over and check it out.  Their happy hour specials are reasonable and you won't be dissappointed."							
3UOMW19E6DMHJZ40721RE7NDI8FC5P	For the money you can't go wrong. The food is fresh and tastes like Italian food. No fusion nonsense here. All dishes hot and tasty. Service good. A popular spot for locals and tourists. You can't go wrong for chain Italian.							
3PUV2Q8SV4KTD7RN88NF1Z5ND4DBDP	"For where I was at and for the deal that TGIF usually has this place wasn't half bad.... I could have spent $50 a person and went to the Bellagio, but what would I do after I ate, gamble? Nay, here at the Orleans they have a 72 lane bowling alley. But that's for another review.   The servers are nice, but they had a lot of tables that were full so they were spread pretty thin, so I'll grant them some leniency.  So TGIF has a special going on here where it's buy one of the Jack Daniels Specials get another one free. Now that saves at least $14 off the bill and with a group of 5 with an overall bill of $45 we thought was pretty decent (that includes the drinks) so I'd go back here for a quick bite. But remember you're not going to leave here thinking that this is the best of Las Vegas, but you'll leave content that you filled yourself without going over budget.   I wonder if Rachel Ray's still doing her $40 a Day show....? Well Enjoy."							
3QREJ3J433DD4MJ9R2YWJFWI97NKLX	"Formerly Falbo's, until the owner branched out on his own. He's kept up the good work.   Not your choice for a fast, cheap pie -- for that, Domino's and Pizza Hut deliver -- but how does the saying go? ""Good food is not fast, fast food is not good?"" Having said that, the $5-two-slices-and-a-drink deal at lunch is a steal, especially if ""food coma"" tops your afternoon to-do list.  For the price, the pizza goes a long way because it's dense -- the crust is substantial and the toppings plentiful -- and the ""large"" is truly large.   If you're hankering for pizza in V'Town, AJ's should be your go-to choice."							
3SNR5F7R9298SLJTADQGT4RL86YEIU	"Found this place by happenstance while trying to find Albertsons. We came in on a Monday and discovered their half off tapas special. We admittedly went a little crazy and boy were we glad we did! The tapas was amazing. We ordered the grilled asparagus, tempura artichoke hearts, sea scallops, calimari, ribs, and ox tail. All of these dishes were incredible.   Unfortunately, they were out of the escargot. Guess that leaves something for next time! :) We finished dinner off the Spanish coffee and the lava cake.   We will definitely be back and with friends/family too!"							
3CMIQF80GN6HW4EXH3CRQIQUIIQQ6N	"Fresh food, attentive staff and boy is it fast!  I like the skillets and they'll sub out my toast for fruit, which is nice.  I never feel like I ate heavy, sticky, icky food when I leave and I like that.  Every single employee you encounter interacts with you with a big ol' smile on their face.  There is ONE wait person who is a little ditzy and I try to avoid her like the plague, but overall I am very impressed with this place.  Not a greasy diner, no siree!  Tasty!  I'd eat lunch here sometime too but their gluten free lunch options are just about non-existent.  I wish they'd change that."							
362E9TQF2H66CZFKG8G4T7CXLMCIGE	"FRIENDLY, FAST SERVICE AND GREAT FOOD. NEIGHBORHOOD FAVORITE.   --eggs overcooked --oj watery but tasty --food not greasy or oily --everything just a little bit healthier than you'll find elsewhere."							
3YD0MU1NC2H8DOLLBHKX6WBL9BP7AX	Friends made reservations here for dinner and I expected the usual high Las Vegas prices and brusque service. I was pleasantly surprised in that the service was excellent and the food was super-delicious.   I tried one of the pasta specialties with chicken and shrimp and it was excellent for only $18.50. Everyone else commented on how good their food was.   I highly recommend Maggiano's for a fantastic Italian dinner in a relaxed and friendly atmosphere. I'm looking forward to my next dinner there!							
3087LXLJ6MWPR4291YLG5ICPYDVF0H	"George's is nothing short of incredible. The original gyro is loaded with tender gyro meat and the right amount of Tzatziki sauce (yogurt and cucumber are the main ingredients) and reasonably priced. On occasion you can grab it at $5 but even at the normal price of $6.25 it's a bargain. It comes with fries or salad. If you're adventurous, you can choose from variations of the original including a Philly Gyro. The service is super friendly and helpful. The guy who prepares your sandwich evens delivers it to your table with a smile. The place is a little challenging to find. It's on the back end of the Papago Plaza sandwiched between some vacant stores and a barber shop but worth the search!"							
32PT7WK7DMVOACNATF89JG7BPC03DQ	Giving this place one star in order to write my review.  My bf and I were there on Thursday night. We were both starving!!! We sat down and were greeted promptly. We ordered an appetizer and a few different tapas.  Bacon wrapped dates (our favorite tapas) came out super HOT! My bf burned his mouth. The bacon was really fatty which explains why it was burnt.  Empanadas had a mushy meat which resembled pured (?) old shredded beef...not good.  Crocketas were deep fried but super soggy??? How does that happen? and who knows what was in them. It was supposed to be chicken with bchamel sauce but tasted more like a Campbell's cream soup---wait generic cream soup- Campbell's would've actually helped--- w chunks of who knows what. I've had bchamel sauce and that was not it!  Chorizo was served cut into tiny pieces 5 pieces altogether and was so oily that some of the oil ended on my shirt...goodbye silk blend piece :(  Finally we decided on gnocchi...pasta right? You can't mess this dish up- I've made it myself at home with OTC sauce...well surprise! Salty and gnocchi tasted so un fresh!  I will not return to this place. Seriously! My bf even said he would much rather take his chances on the other more known tapas place then step back in here. How is this place still having people come in and order FOOD? Clearly these people lack a trained palates or maybe they lost their taste buds in a freak incident. I went home and purposely made myself sick - I kept wondering what was in those Crocketas and empanadas. The thought of how old the food was...it was too much for me.							
3TZDZ3Y0JSMGXJWEUVPO9R9O07719F	"Go elsewhere.    Service is mediocre, at best.   Food is bland.   Firefly down the street is much better."							
39AYGO6AFF0WT7151BKAMOVPD73N6X	"Go for the 13.99 Steak and Lobster special, stay for the...well, don't stay. Just eat and leave, cause this is TGI Friday's and the rest of Las Vegas is just outside your door!  Servers were friendly, food was average, decor was as expected...everything was just as expected. If you've made the mistake of staying in Vegas too long and you want to feel like you're back at TGI's wherever you're from...well, this one is here for you."							
3G5RUKN2ECJJBQ33ZINM6YMR38B9NU	"Good ""big box"" food joint, with lots of different options.  Nothing crazy good or crazy bad.  Chili's fraternal twin."							
39N6W9XWRD3S2ZUPKQ27FV6LB5AYG0	"Good authentic Chinese Food, just need to know what dishes to order and to ask for spicy or non spicy. Good Peking Duck, House Special Chow Mein and Tofu with Cha Sui.  Very busy during lunch with downtown customers where they will seat you in a table to share with others. Service is always good and prompt with good prices.  Pretty clean for a Chinese Restaurant, you will not be disappointed."							
3DTJ4WT8BDVUNB83AHE2TZUB4J0EZR	Good breakfasts options. They have your classics and some tasty healthy alternatives too.							
378G7J1SJLEQTG3YZUUVUV0TNHWEW1	Good food but had to FIND our server every time we needed anything. Unacceptable when you are paying to eat out.							
3AA88CN98PJX4LQ8AHNMDNYEIMRYK3	"Good food, not located on 61 and Thomas, the address is 3rd and Thomas. Key West Crepegg, is really good."							
3L55D8AUFADFLNEKI46OP4L6DDICY4	"Good food, standard pricing for tapas, good selection, great service. Server assumed we hadn't had tapas before and gave us some general ideas about ordering a selection of different items and sharing. I think they brought us one item that we didn't order, but it looked so good we ate it anyway. Really good sliders & Spanish coffee (alcoholic.)"							
379OL9DBSSUDNP7H6KWXNEKY7SG9YL	Good food!							
3EGKVCRQFW8WBIME44ATEKFOVSIYBJ	Good food. Lots of choices. The Jack Daniels chicken strips are the best. The burgers are great too!							
31MCUE39BK2RMWX1V59HP1A824G3G0	"Good God...parmesan meatballs!   Take a meatball, bread it, deep fry it, and serve it with marinara and mozzarella!  Just wish the service was more consistent.  We ate here more than once on the trip.  Lunch was great - greetings at the door, prompt/friendly service, and good food.  The late night dining not so much.  No greeter, no water when we ordered, no silverware with the food, no one to bring the check.  Hmmmm...  Need a little work.  I understand it's late, but if the restaurant is going to offer late night hours they need to be sure the guest experience is up to standards."							
3Y3N5A7N4GPSU9QBVT02S0QI7RMMYW	"Good gyros, clean and friendly staff."							
3I7SHAD35MC9FPUA8KA2FN6L3SEM7W	"Good Italian food although the hostess took forever to seat us. Our server was much better and the food was good. We got the chopped salad which was great and the pesto, chicken, pine nut linguine. It actually wasn't spectacular but it was much better later that night for dinner."							
3D4BBDG7ZHCE5KHWTJDYZAPT4COC3Z	"Good Italian food, for decent prices! Spacious and attentive service.  Highly recommend trying the patio, it's shaded and if it's not too hot out, should be a nice experience!    Fried calamari, oven roasted pork loin, chicken parm and tiramisu are a must!"							
30Z7M1Q8UY0CD2Q4LMC3KW7GKVVA8N	Good Italian food. A tip they need to fix that elevator from parking garage takes forever (a good 5 min) to come down and when its 100+ degrees outside and everyone is dressed nicely (dresses & suits) and starting to sweat profusely ummm it is not cute!							
32TMVRKDGNEXBDANCL2C7TLGSLZ486	"Good location, right at Fashion Show Mall. Fantastic Italian food, prices are not to bad either"							
3BC9H1KCYUSOZLKPZV6P1YS95T0YWZ	"Good pasta. Good desserts. Good view.  I've eaten at Maggiano's in Princeton, New Jersey and in Atlanta, Georgia. I really wanted to try Las Vegas' Maggiano's. It did not disappoint.  I ordered the chicken fettuccine alfredo, which was delish. The warm, italian bread dipped in seasoned olive oil was finger-licking good; not that I licked my fingers... I had three delicious dishes for the mini dessert sampler: New York style cheesecake (yummy), apple crostada (yummy), and chocolate Zuccotto cake (yummy).  The price was pretty good.   I dined alone as my friends were napping to recover from the evening's debaucheries.   I will be back!"							
31J7RYECZL6BYLXNJSSEE00J01NL1V	"Good portions , Good prices and delicious food !"							
3538U0YQ1FAL8W16KL3Z7GAW1PG3F1	"Got a groupon for here.  The food is pretty good, and nothing on the menu has been bad after our second visit.  The only thing lacking are the drinks... The Bloody Ceasar is pretty good, most most of the menu drinks are just so-so"							
3I01FDIL6MOZPURRPFU4062JJY12DF	"Great atmosphere, great fresh food. The plates have just the right amount of flavor, even the ""heaviest"" dishes end up being pretty light. The prices are really good and accommodate every appetite since most plates are available in full and half size. We spent 4 days in Vegas and had dinner at the Maggiano's twice!"							
3WRBLBQ2GROV54Y4CIRYN3C1ZSVG0H	"Great atmosphere, make sure to park Valet on the northeast corner of the mall and take elevator. We made reservations and was seated promptly. Our server, Seidi was unbelievable and offered great suggestions. She made our party feel very welcomed. Food was great!  Recommendations: App- zucchini sticks Meal- Chicken Parm Des- tiramisu"							
37J05LC5AXZZVQPZW00WZNO0L9MJDI	"Great atmosphere! My recommendations (2 of the recommendations with a great server) are the braised oxtail, ferran adria beer (great summer ale), manchego cheese, pil pil  shrimp. Definitely will be coming back for more."							
32K26U12DN48MLPTDPEF2BZUGWSVDE	"Great casual atmosphere.  We had the sangria,  escargot,  paella, and tequila rice pudding.  Everything was excellent.  It was my first time having escargot and it didn't disappoint. Chef Oscar came around and spoke with us. We even added him to our Facebook.  Great to speak with a chef with such passion about his food."							
3MDKGGG61Q3UOK6PY76MVN1H2PPT64	Great customer service from our waiter Pete. He was awesome.  Very friendly and attentive.  Portions are so big you can share. Great authentic Italian food.							
3L60IFZKF3YKG0ZBUWG1EVNJ09BHHK	Great dinner & great prices for Southern Italian food.  Excellent service from our server.							
32LAQ1JNT95FQVWQUP4PBTFX5B7TU6	"Great dinner, the portion was huge and I couldn't finish it.  Our waiter was top notch and I enjoyed myself.  Recommend reservations."							
3ZXV7Q5FJB49LWXPDEE00JEQ72SCF7	Great family priced meal for a large group. Came here to celebrate a birthday and we Enjoyed. Only disappointing was the gnocchi. Waiter was excellent and the desserts were very enjoyable!							
3KLL7H3EGDHPY1UVZLX5TWES8OMHVA	Great food and great service.  Perfect for groups with their family style plates.  Deep fried zucchini is a must.							
3IZVJEBJ6A0QAWFO4ZV4HB2YNLC6ZY	Great food and great service.  What more do you want?							
33J5JKFMK6EIZLRFY1ETJFEA8ROQ3H	Great Food very tasty and some unique dishes I'd never seen before like Pillow Chicken!  Large portions and nice presentation on plate.  Open cafeteria style dining room.  Prompt waitresses and waiters...							
388FBO7JZR9YCRBB7UF25FFICHWNYX	"Great food, amazing atmosphere. The portions are very big, take that into account when you order."							
3UXQ63NLAA2CBJFFLPL3KCDSMDFBL5	"Great food, chicken florentine was delicious. Nice atmosphere,  right off the strip. I'll go back to this place in a heartbeat."							
3VQTAXTYN31FU929U3D4BZ9BZ48BUZ	"Great food, good service. The crab cakes were solid; not Pacific NW good but still great for the middle of the desert. Portions were large so wishing my wife and and I would have split and entree. The Lobster Carbonara was excellent. The bacon and lobster gave the spag noodles a rich flavor."							
3LOJFQ4BOXVU6AVHEL0802OD0YMKDI	"Great food, however this place doesn't build it's business off of customer service. If you have any special request forget about it. They don't have to worry about repeat customers in a location like this. Doesn't matter to them that you are spending a nice good amount of money to take your family out for a nice evening. We asked if we could sit on the patio... No, even tho plenty of tables. Can we sit by the window? (Vegas) if you want to wait 20-30 min... Again plenty of open tables. Guess what?? There's a lot of other great restaurants in Vegas!!"							
3ACRLU860NUY5D5N43YZ7HN8DGEBEI	"Great food, very good selection. Love the atmosphere.Will go back. Highly recommended."							
3L2OEKSTW9QD9KO71SQJNIPNNMY8YV	"Great food! Awesome service! But above all, one of the cleanest restaurants I've ever been to. I would recommend this restaurant in a heart beat."							
3QX22DUVOOXBQFV6QIDIL1MOPAKMVN	Great food! Great atmosphere! And great staff! 5 stars is an understatement. I would recommend this place to everyone!!! Can't wait to go back and try the rest of the menu!!							
3ODOP6T3AS0MPY8YW4TBX28D6L7241	Great food! Typical Italina food (or Americanized Italian food rather).							
3D1UCPY6GGPCTHRJC7XTXOTAEL338K	"Great guys, great food. Plus right next to one of my favorite bars.."							
338GLSUI43RPSDMLA040FOI8T5EFS4	Great healthy breakfast!							
3W0KKJIARRPIPFZQXDPSEAACP7PK8C	"Great Italian food, very nice location, good white table cloth restaurant with reasonable prices. Friendly staff."							
3DW3BNF1GHYW5QT2WH3ZGJLT55VV88	"Great Italian food. Could be a bit pricey for what you get at this restaurant. I ordered the lobster ravioli (which literally gives you like 8 pieces or something), and it was very good.   I love pasta, and this place seems to cook it well. The bread isn't that bad here either. Great service too!  I have been to the one in Santa Row in CA, and I feel that the vibe there is more elegant than this one (since this one is in the Fashion Mall). Bring your family here..."							
3DWGDA5POFKEUQ9HXWUK19YLRZQ1VV	"Great location in Vegas. Food is god, price is reasonable.Nothing too especial about it. Very small outdoor seating great indoors."							
3R5OYNIC2CP2YQOUD35V1NSYXUFPT6	"Great pizza spoiled by a poor conditions in the restaurant.  I will say that my family and I enjoyed our pizza - a delicious, hot thin-crust pizza with fresh toppings and good sauce.  What concerns, me, however, is the condition of the restaurant and the kitchen.  We decided to dine-in.  Initial impression was good - a fun little pizzeria with a pinball machine and a coin-op video game in the corner.  Another family was seated and appeared to be enjoying their pizza.  Things went south soon after we sat down.  Cleanliness is a problem for the restaurant.  There were flies buzzing all over and I was repeatedly brushing them off of our table, my kids and myself.  When the server brought a stack of plates, two of them were dirty and I had to exchange them for clean-er-ish ones.  The kitchen, visible from the counter by the entrance, didn't look super clean either.  I was also a little offended that the flat screen in the corner was tuned to one of those Pawn shop reality shows.  I had to explain to my kids why there was swearing and threats of violence (things I would never let my kids see or hear normally) on the TV.  If the owner expects families to dine there, it shouldn't be the responsibility of the patron to ask the owner to switch to something more family-friendly.  It's sad - we really enjoyed our pizza but that I won't be returning because I won't be able to eat it without questioning the sanitary conditions it was made in."							
3LG268AV38MLLKMC00KP7WSCV2HERY	"Great place for breakfast and a cup of coffee. The ladies here are amazing and super nice. They bring out my food in a timely manner and the eggs benedict there are to die for. During the Fall/Winter season, they have a specials menu that was delicious. If they still have it I recommend trying the pulled pork sandwich and the butternut squash soup. meals are reasonable priced, and if you go online and subscribe to their newsletter you get a buy one get one entree coupon for your next visit, and you get a free entree on your birthday. This place never disappoints."							
3L1EFR8WWTL7NYQM1U49YTDI1HPF9T	Great place! Great food!							
3MNJFORX8BKOMBOAY4RSMD8GFL7F53	Great place!!! Waitress was kind of slow but still attentive.							
3L1EFR8WWTL7NYQM1U49YTDI1HQF9U	"Great restaurant, great food, great service, it was truly an amazing night followed by Mystere which was an amazing show as well.  Even had the 2 little old men come to the table to serenade us! lol"							
3E24UO25QZ6EBS1H2QKN1DVU3H8O6D	"Great salads, food and service. There is not a bad seat in the house!!"							
3TUOHPJXYHDZZGUFUZKNIKL03N6XWS	Great Service - super nice guy at the counter. Gyro Meat - AMAZING! Lots of meet in the Pita Location - Good Atmophere- SO So  I would hit this place up for take out!							
3NQUW096N6OTNQ0IN577T6I2YDC9LT	Great service the staff all have great smiles.  Oatmeal and turkey sausage links with black coffee.  The pecans and cranberries make the oatmeal tasty							
3APP19WN71UQJFKJE77FW4MSCVI6G9	"Great service, food, and reasonably priced.. The Belgian Waffle was one of the best I have ever had, we had a great waiter very attentive n quick with all request. Will b back again.."							
3A9LA2FRWSUH2QZQZ0YNHHBDOZTHXC	"Great Summerlin local spot. My wife and I have been there a handful since its opening and have never had a bad meal, bad service or an unpleasant time. I recommend going when the spanish guitar player is there. Really makes for a wonderful atmosphere."							
3BPP3MA3TC0AIMRZVGNTLKJDPASEL8	"Great tapas with good prices. Chicken tacos on their specials page were awesome. Wanted to order more tapas, but filled up pretty quick. Ended up ordering the chicken tacos twice. Fried calamari and seared scallops were good. Sauces with the Calamari were good, however the scallops - you only get three - serve at least one more even if you have to raise the price. The bread they served was wonderful - great experience. k"							
3CVDZS288HGMUI9GQ38E3FJ21GXMF0	Great ziti and sausage.							
3ZUE82NE0AH79T7CW2YVYXI7HB8F85	"Greetings,   BEST ITALIAN IN VEGAS!!!  I recently visited Sin City and decided to get a late dinner at Maggiano's Little Italy. I would like to start by saying I've never had better service for a late Italian Dinner in my life.  We showed up at 10:00 and basically shut this place down, but not before we met the server of the century, Jake!  The food was outstanding and it was as if Jake new exactly what myself and my other wanted the moment we walked in.  Hands-down the best attention to detail I've experienced.    If you ever find yourself ready for a late Italian Dinner, this is the spot!  Ask for Jake, ask him a question and he has a long answer!   As for other highly rated main-stream Italian joints, they have nothing on this place and best part about it, below they have Dollar you call it drinks!  Enjoy!!!"							
3OKP4QVBP2DR6HWM4KORC9OE8E8AG3	"Had a group of 24, which is big even in Vegas. Treated us very well, fairly fast service and the portions were HUGE. Could not believe that if you finished a dish, they would keep bringing more out. All you can eat with a restaurant atmosphere."							
3QX22DUVOOXBQFV6QIDIL1MOPAKVMW	"Had dinner here before a Wranglers game on a Friday night. I was cautiously optimistic about eating here because I know these kinds of places can be hit or miss, but we had a nice time.   There was a pretty long line outside waiting for tables (both dining room and bar) but it went by fast. We sat in the bar area to have the Happy Hour specials. $6 apps, $5 sangrias, $3 bottled beer.   The Food: We got the pretzel sticks, pretty yummy, I think they were fried, which is different than I am used to, but I still liked them. Potato skins were yummy, good sized and there were a ton of them. Loaded skillet chip nachos were delicious, loved the cheese.   The Drinks: Raspberry Sangria, pretty sweet, definitely needed food to help balance it out, but I enjoyed it.   The Service: Everyone from the hostess to the waitress was very nice. Waitress was very attentive and checked up on us several times.  Overall a good dinner experience and a place I would certainly choose over a Chilis or Applebees."							
3BFNCI9LYK68T3M0225NJOXF31X731	"Had dinner last night with the family and I'm giving them 4.5 stars for the service and the food.  The wait is rather long, that's why I gave it 4.5 and the food is a little pricey.  Our server was very attentive and always smiling whenever she comes to our table, making sure that we have what we need.  I ordered the Lobster carbonara.  It was very good, with lots of lobster meat (it's mostly from the claw).  They have big portions, so my daughter, my husband, and I have to bring home half of our food.    I will go back to this restaurant because of the food and service."							
36D1BWBEHNH2TOX428T7JWPDSCSM2G	"Had lunch at Maggiano's in the Fashion Show mall. It was a nice setting with an outdoor area. We sat indoors, but we had a great view of the Palazzo hotel. Overall a gorgeous window view.  Ordered the veal scaloppine piccata style and an Arnold Palmer. The veal scallopine was flavorful, especially with the pickled capers that had almost a tangy sensation. There was also spinach placed at the bottom of the veal. It was a light bed of spinach and I felt that I could have benefited with a bit more. The dish came with a side of angel hair. As for the drink, it was just your typical Arnold Palmer, half iced tea half lemonade.  Our server seemed really versed with the various menu items and the ingredients. At first I thought it was only our server and his personality that made him a great host, but after listening in another table it seems all the servers are well-trained and sociable. I applaud the servers for their knowledge and service.  Overall it was a good experience, but not a restaurant of choice since it's a chain. When I am in Vegas, I prefer to dine in locations that are exclusive Vegas restaurants. I feel as though that would add to the experience versus eating at a chain that is readily accessible in my hometown."							
3MD8CKRQZZ3TW084E1VG4C540ADRJW	"Had our wedding reception in the banquet hall, and it was an amazing space for our party.  GREAT Service GREAT Food Great Drinks  Highly Recommend."							
35A1YQPVFEW8W2Q0ZCXDPAL8VDYI5W	"Had the hot & spicy Sichuan Prawns, expecting too hot, but had the right kind of spice! Yum, yum, yummy. Wish the would Chinese Fried Chicken more often, last time I tried to order, they had run out, so had crispy duck. It was good, but still wish it was crispy chicken...LOL"							
3L1EFR8WWTL7NYQM1U49YTDI1HQ9FO	"Had the lunch 2fer combo, turkey sandwich and pecan salad. Both were amazing. I added on a cup of tomato bisque that I used for dipping the sandwich in. Delish!   (:"							
3H4IKZHALBY40S7X0S6ROZHB8XSNN7	"Had the worst meal of my life at Lion Brewery.   1. I ordered French Onion soup as a starter. It tasted like an entire bottle of pepper had been accidentally poured into it beforehand, making it undrinkable/inedible.  2. Ordered wings as the main course. They were, quite literally, battered in salt.   3. Combined with the over-peppered soup and over-salted wings, my mouth was uncomfortable and on fire.  4. My friend ordered a Chicken Pot Pie. He found chicken bone fragments in it.  All in all, not a good experience."							
3NZ1E5QA6ZHY9UCUT25W3NHV0NFB5H	Hadn't been here in a while and it was very yummy. Glad to see the recession didn't drag the quality down like at so many other chains.							
3L2OEKSTW9QD9KO71SQJNIPNNMXY8K	"Half-price tapas can always make a manic Monday better!  Monday eves, my BFF and I try to drop by and sit at the bar to catch whatever game is on, maybe play a game or two, and savor comp drinks and half-priced tapas.  Our favs include the seared salmon, served atop a bed of spinach and drizzled with a bchamel sauce (omg, I refuse to share this plate with anyone); the arroz con pollo savory rice with tender chicken; and whatever else calls to me.  BFF smacks her lips at the sight of this ahi dish she requests and licks her fingers and plate after devouring her salty-peppery garlicky seared shrimp.  It's been fairly busy the Mondays we've been there, and a bonus is that either she or I is usually lucky at the video games, so it's an inexpensive fun dinner.  Background music is great, the staff is always friendly and welcoming, plus service is prompt.  What I really LOVE and appreciate is that it's a non-smoking environment and I don't leave there smelling like an ashtray.  Maybe to attract a clientele all nights and to keep things rolling through the week, the owners should promote a Happy Hour every week day ... not just Mondays!"							
3H5TOKO3D9ZA7ZRZJ65ENFPPMQ946K	Hands down the best Italian food in town. Great atmosphere and location with very reasonable prices considering. Go there on a once a month basis and have no intentions on that changing. Keep up the good work!							
3M47JKRKCXHBQ0E1V9VR4R5UOC568T	Happy hour makes this a good find.  They have a big margarita for six bucks.  Not bad.  Good flavor definitely not watered down.  I gravitate towards the Jack Daniels menu items.  The ribs are 4 out 5 stars and they salads are definitely worth a look.							
3MZ3TAMYTL3X1POYWJAGSBQ4NVORIK	Happy hour was great.  We had the happy hour flatbread and beers which were excellent.  It was probably the best meal so far on our Vegas trip.  The pasta dishes were also wonderful as well as the service.  I would definitely return.							
311HQEI8RSW9EWTTN90WNP2UIWVZ7P	"Have been for lunch and dinner and have not been disappointed. Looking forward to more visits. They make my favorite pasta dish (spaghetti with red clam sauce) here and it certainly did not let me down. So much flavor. The bread served when you sit down is fresh and delicious, and was made even better with the oil and vinegar blend served alongside (the italian way, no butter necessary). Service was excellent and the food was hot and fresh.  Atmosphere and music were just what you would expect from a fine Italian restaurant.  No complaints here."							
36KM3FWE3RSCCBN3JFN4HQZ80PD706	"Have been to this restaurant multiple times. Made a 6pm reservation and was seated promptly when arrived. My friend and I had the calamari app, rustic chicken pasta and veal parm. Everything delcious. Even saved room fro teh tiremisu desert which is probabaly one of the best tiremisu's I ever eat. Assad our waited was on top of things the whole time. made sure we always had everything we wanted and very friendly. I will ask for him next time I go. Only reason didn;t give it 5 star is because the items are just a tad bit pricey i think. I have noticed the prices inch up little by little every tiem I visit. But since this is a Vegas strip location, they can do this I guess, since more tourists than locals go here."							
3WRKFXQBOBN6YQ0KAE2A07J1QI2YIS	"He a group of six, all we very happy. We all ordered different items and appetizers and had to bring home food. Portions are large and service was great."							
37ZQELHEQ0EYIAMXORRRBKSB37INM7	"Heard great things about this place but wasn't impressed. It took over an hour to get our dinner. Had simple fettuccini Alfredo w chicken. It had decent taste but the sauce had the consistency of soup. It was so runny I could not eat it w my fork. The only place I saw the chicken was on my bill! On a good note the bread was good!  Sadly this will make my list of the ""one and done""."							
3Q2T3FD0ONORE6TN687C26U5YQSM3R	"Heard this location is under new management and is experiencing some issues. My last visit was last October, so this review will be based on that experience.   Maggiano's is one of my absolute favorite restaurants. Why? Because it's great food, healthy portions, and outstanding value for what you get. I always leave satisfied and the service has always been wonderful. Visited the Santa Ana, CA, Chevy Chase, MD, and Tyson's Corner, VA locations - all the BOMB!   My favorites:   Rigatoni 'D'  Chicken Parmesan - I order this with a side of pasta and meat sauce since the chicken parm does not come with it  Apple Crostada  Peach Bellini - Now you know I have to have a cocktail with dinner!   I've also sampled the spaghetti which is also pretty good. Honestly, I've had better though.   Maggiano's is one of the last locations on the strip that offers a classy upscale atmosphere without the pretentiousness and is extremely affordable and family friendly.  I highly recommend Maggiano's."							
3QTFNPMJC6YYHHLG3GHLJMOKIB0NZO	Highly suggest Maggiano's inside the Fashion Show mall on the Las Vegas Strip. Great quality Italian! Yummy appetizers & delicious meals like Momma would make! Request a table with a view & you will love your visit even more! Friendly staff! Always go there when I'm in the mood for the best Italian food in Sin City! Great place to take a date or get family style dining with the friends or family!!							
3XEIP58NL038THIVR3166UKVDG1LZL	"Honestly, why have I not found this chain sooner!?  Maggiano's was my favorite place of my Vegas trip. I must admit, it was slightly biased- I was part of an organization, and the organization catered the food.. so I had, literally, had a TON of food. Nonetheless, it was the best way to try the food!  First, the appetizers came out. After having the appetizers, I was pretty set on making that my lunch! There was bruschetta, tomato caprese, two types of salad, but my favorite was the stuffed mushrooms. OH MAN, SO GOOD. I was trying to be all professional at this lunch, but all I really wanted to do was to just take the plate of mushrooms and eat off the plate. It was so juicy and flavorful!   Next, came the actual entrees. After filling up on the mushrooms and good salads, I was about stuffed already. The entrees were all really good as well! There was the Four Cheese ravioli (mmm, def was one of my faves!), herb chicken, pork medallions (also, one of my faves!), some pasta + vodka dish, and some great tasting beef. It was all really really good.  What really topped the meal off (well, any meal for all I'm concerned about) was the DESSERTS. First, these gigantic profiteroles came out, made out of huge biscuits and lots of ice cream. But, my favorite of all time came out.. the tiramisu!! As tiramisu is my all time favorite dessert, I had high expectations of this dessert.. and it was met. It was the right amount of lightness and the cheese was just right.. I was in heaven.   Our waiter was great as well, explaining every item he brought out and was prompt on filling our drinks. He even answered nicely to all my curious questions of, ""so... what exactly is that? What is it cooked in?"" etc.   Perhaps my view was slightly biased as I did not even have to pay for this lunch, but all I know, is the food was GREAT, and I would love to find a Maggiano's close to me! Mmm. :)"							
3PUOXASB57JDSFHM26YG1LT0DMJZ91	HORRIBLE FOOD POISONING.  My first night moving to Las Vegas I ate there and got terrible food poisoning.  I had a steak and got what was most likely E. Coli poisoning.  Would not recommend going to this place. There are much better places for Italian food even without the food poisoning.							
3G5RUKN2ECJJBQ33ZINM6YMR38BN98	"Horrible ribs, horrible service, I will never come back here again. I am speaking this as a person who used to work as a waiter back in my college days. At first, we ordered bbq baby back ribs and food was overcooked and dry. Waiter's name was Dean and he was clumsy, nearly dropped the food at my friend. Well, s*** happens. I used to be a waiter for a sushi restaurant and I've had my bad days. So we were compensated by getting different entree. By the time we got our food, we lost our appetite but still finished the shrimp pasta. We asked for our check to pay the bill. It took him 20 minutes to close our tab because he couldn't get his priorities straight. I recall having bad, clumsy days, such as putting entrees one over the other and end up squashing the bottom entree, spilling drinks, but I've never kept my patrons waiting. I would close out the tabs and let the patrons go so that new customers can come and take the seats. I would never come here again. Rather go to oyster bar next door or drive outside since there are so many restaurants. I've had enough patience and tolerance with this place since I used to be a waiter myself."							
37VHPF5VYCJ06HN2508UQRX4KYGC8R	"Horrible. The rudest staff and establishment I have ever dealt with. I booked my reservation a few days ahead of time for 7:45 pm. Due to Las Vegas traffic and a double overtime basketball game I attended, our party arrived at approximately 7:55. I checked in to the front desk and said hello. To which I was not greeted and immediatly asked for the reservation name. I provide the name and am told that due to my lateness, keep in mind I am 10 minutes late to a reservation at a restaurant, they marked me as a no show and notified the yelp reservation site. At this point I am already annoyed, but I am on vacation and starving so I state the reason for my 10 minutes of tardiness. I continue and ask if we  can get another table. The ""greeter"" says I will have to wait at the end of the line for an hour to two hour  wait . I am still calm at this point and oblige to stand and wait. A minute passes and a heavy set supervisor type asks my party to move from the desk area. We move over to the corner by a coat rack. Another minute passes, the supervisor again states to move away from the coat rack area also. With my patience drawing low, I move over again to another open spot in the corner. After a couple minutes the supervisor AGAIN states to move away from this new spot. Not once does he show us another place to stand, nor does he say please or  thank you or anything but move. Rather, he comes off as annoyed at the fact that we are occupying space and breathing within the reastaurant. Finally, we have had enough and call the manager . A ""manager type"" scaddadles over after about 15 minutes and says whats wrong. We tell him the situation and he coldly replies that he is busy and the we missed our reservation time. Also so, he has no suggestion as to where to stand and wait in the restaurant. We left. Ridiculous service by a faux Italian establishment that has not the slightest idea about Italian culture, gratitude or hosting. They are obviously solely interested in getting you in and out as fast as possible. You are not a customer to them, you are another number to stuff with chef boyardee noodles at $20 a pop."							
3FK4G712NXGYWIR7GK4ZMN1NIV8SS0	How can you beat super cold beer on the tap?  Ordered the chicken skewers and a chicken tostada salad with my wive and it had amazing flavor.  I would highly recommend this place...							
3OQQD2WO8IM5IN3WLT9KADNOHH83IS	"How this place gets a two star and others get a 4 rating mystifies me. The food is predictably good. It isn't a top line steakhouse, but you don't pay those prices. Not to mention that it is designed to accommodate sports fans with the numerous televisions.  The staff is courteous and they have great specials. We had steak and lobster for $15. We took advantage of the special a couple of times while there. I like TGIF's in general, and this being in a great casino, Orleans, is just an added benefit. I will definitely go back the next time we visit in a few months!"							
3KL228NDMV2XIU58GB1G6NRADQ2KGS	Huge portions and good service. Will be going back here when in Vegas again!!!							
3NQUW096N6OTNQ0IN577T6I2YDBL94	"I actually find it insane that i'm giving a Maggiano's 4 stars but it happens i guess.  This is definitely not fine dining unless you are part of the applebees, red lobster, sizzler crowd.   Not to say the food is bad, it's either good or pedestrian depending on which side of the fence you are on.  The reason why i'm giving this place such a high score is because the service was extremely good.  The food was decent but too salty."							
3Y3N5A7N4GPSU9QBVT02S0QI7RMYM8	"I always loved going to Maggiano's while living in LA. I have to say my most recent visit  to the LV location will probably be my last. Reservations are a must, but the bar, reception, and dining areas are always so packed full of pushy people. The wait staff is so stressed out by all the drinks, bread, meals, desserts, and checks that they barely have a minute to be cordial. I equate Maggiano's with romance-dark setting, big booths, great music and good food. Well, sadly the place has turned into family heaven. There was every age group of child from infant strapped to his dad's chest, to toddlers in strollers parked in the isle, to children throwing tantrums, to teens glued to their iPhones. Sorry to say, just the sights and sounds of all these children during my meal turned my evening into a spectator event rather than a romantic dinner. I suggest keeping the kids with grandma or the babysitter, but probably most of the kids we saw were tourists so I think I will just try my luck at a different Italian restaurant off The Strip."							
3AC6MFV69KY67LZ50IM8E2ROWZSHZA	"I always stop by Maggiano's when in Vegas and the rigatoni D ($16.75) never disappoints.The description for the frutti di mare ($21.95)  which is  pasta with lobster, shrimp, mussels, clams and spicy lobster tomato broth sounds delicious but it isnt as tasty as it sounds. The sauce was too bland so I ended up eating half of hubby's rigatoni D.   Recommended since it's pretty cheap for strip vicinity area and for their delicious rigatoni D. Rigatoni was overcooked last time but the sauce used in the dish is always wonderful."							
3JMNNNO3B1KYY0RI6AZUSUR4QE5W2G	"i am a HUGE Maggianos fan at the Bellevue Washington location and was excited to see one of my favorite places on the strip.   we get to the restaurant at 5ish. with a party of 5. we are told about 1-1.5 hour wait. okay no problem after looking around and seeing countless open tables we ask why cant we sit at one of the patio tables, they responded with they are reserved but we don't know when they are showing up..   we finally take a seat after an hour wait for the table that was previously reserved but the group never showed up.. i was over it and excited and very hungry.   we ordered the first all you can eat family deal the food was amazing as always.   the service was slow, couldn't answer simple menu questions.. do you meatballs have pork in them? (they don't they are 100% beef)  up to this point was was frustrated that everything seemed disorganized, sloppy and chaotic. it took 20 minutes to get bread on the table.  ------THE REASON FOR 1 STAR------  we were given a table outside on the patio and i was in the back corner of the table. as i was sitting at the table i scooted my chair over and back about 5"" it turns out there was a hole about 2-3"" deep that used to have a hand rail post sticking out of it but was removed to make more room.. i fell back in my chair and some how caught myself mid fall to avoid slamming my head into the cement wall behind me. i pop up and my dad said the dishwasher behind me had a look like i almost died and the server next to me said WHEN I WAS IN THE HOLE PULLING MY CHAIR BACK OUT. ""OH YEAH THERE IS A HOLE THERE"" WTF kind of observation is that. if you know about a preexisting hazard FIX IT!!!  long story short i pulled something my back and was instantly hurting. we contacted the manager who seemed on top of offered to take me to the hospital and call him if i had any problems.  i wasn't about to have my last night in Vegas be ruined by that. for my Pain and all this we got 25% taken off the bill. and i left hurting and in pain.   i think this was a weak compensation for the pain the and hazard, have my mom or dad been sitting here they physically couldn't have caught there balance as fast and would have been seriously hurt."							
3S1WOPCJFG94NW3ZSVBG556LLLNEJ6	"I am grading the food. To me, the basics have to be right before I can judge the whole meal. I like soup and salad along with my meal and I REALLY wanted salad with blue cheese dressing. Turns out they are serving a ""new White Cheddar Broccoli soup"" which is one of my favorites. Soup should not plop, should not be goopy and shouldn't look like someone just opened campbells cream of mushroom and dumped it cold into your bowl. Yes, it was hot, but still that is how it looked and it tasted like overly salted canned soup. I guess you can't mess up lettuce but the ""blue cheese dressing"", pretty sure that was straight mayo. For these two items, which tonight were all I ordered, they were TERRIBLE! I paid my tab and left after two bites (one of each).  I have had other meals here that were okay, not superb or even great but mediocre. I just think that the basics should be considered."							
302OLP89DZNEP5GH2YS8MI3ZAMGCAV	"I am not sure who reviews this place, but I know now it is not worth the rating that it is receiving.   We went here for dinner on a Sunday night supposedly low season in Vegas. The place was crowded, but that was not so much of an issue. The noise level in the restaurant was pretty high, but if you are lucky you might get a table with a good view of the strip.  We ordered the steamed mussels and crab cakes for appetizer. The grilled salmon on a bed of spinach with roasted potatoes.  Kids ate the flat bread pizza and spaghetti with giant meatball.  - Crab cakes were okay, the sauce that comes with it is nice - Mussels in red sauce (Diablo if I remember well). When served they smelled funny. My first impression was that the mussels were steamed and a can of crushed tomatoes was thrown over them. Some spaghetti strings were visible, so I was wondering where the sauce really came from?! But, that was not the problem; the smell was just unbearable that I could not eat these mussels. Returned them and was notified by the waitress that it was not the first time that the mussels smelled. Manager came and offered us another dish, we ordered the fried calamari ... and it was okay. - Salmon on a bed of spinach with roasted potatoes; the salmon was a bit overcooked and was sitting in the juices of the spinach. Not very appetizing to see, I like grilled fish to remain dry when served. The potatoes were really overcooked and very dry on the inside ... they were left to roast just beyond what they needed. - Flat bread pizza, not too bad for a kids meal - Spaghetti with giant meatball; I am not sure what people like about ""giant"" food, but for me it looks disgusting.   We were not charged for the mussels nor for the fried calamari, which is great customer service.   Overall, maybe worth a two or three star but definitely not more than that if you grade it on the food."							
336OE47KI207VRPKUKJ5UZOFNCZWVP	"I am over the moon about this place! I've been here a number of different times and they consistently deliver. The food is so authentic but you can count on a tasteful spin to your traditional Italian dishes. My mom recently ordered the chef's special rigatoni and for once in my life, I saw her finish ALL her food. I have the shrimp and polenta and it was OFF THE HOOK yummy. Perfectly crisp and infused with an amazing lobster bisque sauce. To top of it off, they have the best soundtracks playing in the restaurant. Huge fan of this place and most definitely coming back."							
385MDVINFCVY4WPQDV5MRBDLSPSJWR	"I am totally in love with their fresh brewed mango iced tea, it is really good. Their food is more on the healthy side and offers some choices that are not on most breakfast/lunch spots.   I have tried their eggs benedict with turkey & avocado and it was wonderful. The turkey here tastes fresh roasted and is sliced super thin. Also had their waffle...wow!! its light, fluffy, and not too sweet. Comes with hot syrup and a fruit compote.  Service here is excellent all around, even when they are super busy. I will be back here again and again."							
3XT3KXP24ZE4F6QE4V7IHGZ8R8A6I1	"I am very happy with Maggiano's. I had been there before and knew I would love the food, but sometimes restaurants will let you down when they have to fulfill an order larger than say 8-10. Not so here. My party was about 40 people, and the food and service was top notch. From the catering managers to the actual staff the day of, everyone was professional, accommodating, and very warm and friendly. I honestly cannot complain about a single thing. Everything I hoped for and expected was fulfilled, if not exceeded. You should definitely consider Maggiano's for a wedding reception or wedding/rehearsal dinner! You will not be let down."							
30Y6N4AHYPCGTE8C45951EARVQGRDI	"I ate here with my family and it was a great experience. The wait staff was very friendly and their reservation system is very efficient. I put in my reservation at 8:30 and they had us seated before 9 even though the place was packed. Their food is great too. We got calamari (easily the best I've ever had), stuffed sausages, and mussels as appetizers and 2 types of pasta as part of the group menu deal. Dessert was some tasty cookies.  There was a friendly old man (not sure if he was staff or someone they hired to come in sometimes) singing to couples and people who had birthdays. At one point, the whole restaurant sang happy birthday to this guy with fake Elvis muttonchops. The atmosphere was very comfortable.  I highly recommend this place and I will definitely eat here again!"							
3JVP4ZJHDP891V4Z26R18FPHE5OI0C	"I brought my girlfriend here for her birthday while we were livin' it up in Vegas! A week earlier, I reserved a table for 8pm. We arrived about 15 minutes early and were invited to relax at the bar until our table was ready.   Sure enough, bang on 8pm we were strutting through the restaurant over to our fantastic table for two with a killer view!   We ordered a wealth of food and some delicious red wine sangria. The food was perfect (I think we did that thing again, where we stop talking for the duration of the meal, due to rapid consumption of said delicious food). Our waiter could've been around a little more, but was very friendly and responsive all other times, so it's cool.   I'm gonna go head and call this THE place to eat when you come to the strip. The total for appetizers, entrees, drinks, and dessert was easily the same price that the high end restaurants charge for one person. Not to mention the lack of food those ""high end"" places bring to the table! Maggiano's is perfect for dressing up, chowing down, and hitting the clubs and casinos after!"							
3FCO4VKOZ4TB312XRMMJ2F1CUQNE7Z	"I came here a couple months ago during my vacation in Las Vegas. I was skeptical to try Maggiano's out since they were a chain restaurant but I would be pleasantly surprised. Unfortunately no locations in Canada (where I'm from) yet! This Maggianos is located in the Fashion show mall next to Wynn and Encore Hotels.   Maggiano's isn't exactly fine-dining, but it does have a pretty nice ambiance for a family style restaurant. It has full panoramic glass windows around the perimeter of the dining room, showcasing an awesome view of the Wynn hotel and that part of the strip. While we were there, two violinists went around the restaurant playing songs for each table. And to top it off, our server was so kind and helpful!  The menu here is also pretty interesting and worth a mention. Along side the regular a la cart menu, they also have a ""family style"" menu. Basically you choose several items from a predetermined set, and for a fixed price per pereson, you can order as much of any item you want! Its kind of like ""all-you-can-eat"" but for only the few items you choose. We ended up going for this option and ordered the light family dinner that comes with bottomless portions for 2 appetizers, 2 salads, and 2 pastas.  Maggiano's Salad :  This salad is literally the best salad I've ever had! The signature house dressing was a spicy-sweet vinaigrette, and paired with the crunchy prosciutto bits, I could NOT for the life of me stop eating this!  Crispy Zucchini Fritte :  The waiter said this was their most popular appetizer, and I can see why. The zucchinis are deep fried in a crumbly crunchy batter, and were irresistible with the cool ranch dip  Linguine and Clams with White Clam Sauce:  I did not like this at all. The sauce was runny, and tasted like fishy sea water. It was way too salty.  Our Famous Rigatoni 'D'  :  guess they don't call it ""Famous"" for nothing, this pasta is really really good! The pasta is cooked perfectly al dente, and is served with lots of mushrooms and creamy Marsala sauce.   For a chain, this place really isn't bad! You'll leave for the most part happy and full :)"							
3K8CQCU3KEHUNMGBSTXEKIU219WNWY	"I came here and was there before anyone and they gave us the pager and said wait all of a sudden there were more people coming in and got pagers too and every single one of them got a table before i did. I feel totally disrespected from these workers for not being called and made me wait for an hour, so i left the place. This is just bad service and i feel as if they weren't going to seat me and my guest at all."							
3FULMHZ7OUDCW2CR6MCVCBMBCQOM4C	"I came here for the first time Sept 2011 with a group of 5. Like everyone says, its romantic, has great views of the strip, great service and the food is FANTASTIC.   I had the fried calamari and eggplant parmesean and it was the best eggplant parmesean I've had so far. Everybody else really liked their food too, although I didn't get to try it. However I will be going back. Not to repeat what loads of others have said, so here's my recap:  Pros: -Really good food -Nice ambiance and views -Easy to get to (Fashion Show Mall), cabs can just drop you off curbside in front of the restaurant. -Surprisingly affordable! For the same cost as going to Bucca or Il Fornaio, this food kicks those places butts! (In my opinion =) -The service was great. Super friendly wait staff and very helpful with the menu.  Cons: -Not really a place to bring little ones as its kind of a ""romantic"" and quiet atmosphere, but I'm sure you could have them here."							
3M67TQBQQH4CR79EQEIHKS2R41DA9C	I can't believe I just found out about this place.  I'm a HUGE fan after just one visit!  I was blown away by the tiramasu.  The service was incredible.  The entrees were delicious. The atmosphere was very elegant as well.  You really can't compare Maggiano's to the other chain italian places because they are in a category all their own.							
33NOQL7T9OFDEAYCXES21PYPTG1Z8C	"I cannot rave about this place enough. I only ever get to a Maggiano's on vacations. This time did not disappoint. We went with a party of 6 and had the family style experience. Chopped salad, crab cakes, and gnocchi with sausage to name a few dishes. Everything was perfect. Wait staff was pleasant. A violinist came to our table and even took some unusual requests. Great experience. A must try!"							
3R0WOCG21MP8960T8Z4A6PXB2PKUDP	"I clearly have a different opinion of this place compared to other reviews. this was my second visit here. the first being a few years ago.  I do not even know where to begin.  The place is wall to wall people. So crammed on top of one another. It is so loud you cannot hear what the other people at your table are saying. The tables are not big enough for the amount of people they seat at them. We were 6 people squished in a table which was meant for 4. Our server may have been new so I will try to cut him some slack. but he did get alot of our order wrong. Our drinks were mixed up, it took forever to get our appetizers, the entrees came pretty quickly. but one was wrong. The dessert was the worst part. My sister brought in a cake for my nephews birthday, and it took nearly an hour before it arrived. By this point we asked that it be put back in the box to take home.  The food was not good. There are so many better options for Italian food. Real Italian food. To me this is on the same level of Olive Garden. The one shining star of the meal was the spinach and artichoke dip. it was one of the best I have ever had.  Save your money go elsewhere, where you can have a great meal and a nice conversation.  I for one will never go back."							
3JU8CV4BRLSMLYJMHMJW7DMBYMYPOK	I come to this restaurant every time I'm in Las Vegas. The evening I went it was crowded and the waiter seemed stressed. Even though we had reservations they still made us wait 15 min. They seem to do this every time I come here. The view is fabulous! The food was perfect. It was my birthday so they brought me cookies. The only complaint I have is the restrooms were filthy. Both men and women's.							
3NCN4N1H1GX2ZJI0X21IX4HHR8ENBI	"I consider this place to be one of Phoenix's hidden gems! The service here is always great and fast! I am a creature of habit when it comes to this place. I always get the house chow fun and hot and sour soup, both are amazing!  I have also been here a couple times for lunch. The dishes are great for lunch portions. Definitely check out this place if you haven't before!"							
3VLL1PIENQ4GZ2LS4VHYYBOP8L6ZOG	"I could definitely do without the creepy guy walking around playing the accordian, but I'll put up with it for the really yummy food and fun ambiance!  We have eaten here several times and ordered pretty much everything on the menu at one time or another and have never been disappointed.  Some things are better than others, of course (try the chicken and spinach manicotti -- MMMMmm), but overall the quality has always been good, the service fast, and if you can get a window seat, the view is great for people-watching!  Oh and it sounds really plain and boring, but trust me... try the pound cake for dessert.  YUM!"							
3CVDZS288HGMUI9GQ38E3FJ21GWFMS	"I created a Yelp account specifically to warn people of this place - that's how bad it was. Of the thousands of restaurants I've been to I have never felt the need to write a review so this is a first. First of all, the food was terrible. Just on that fact alone I would never go back. In my entire life I have never sent my food back, but after my first bite of the Chicken and Chorizo Paella I looked down at this huge plate of food and had to send it back. It had a really strange after taste that I can't accurately describe, but I knew I didn't want another bite. At least they did take it off our bill, but a manager never came over. On our way out I think the guy holding the door was the manager; he asked how it was and I was honest. He just mentioned that he would speak to the chef - didn't offer a gift card or anything at all. The service was pretty bad also. One guest didn't like their drink after the first sip and nothing was offered other than to curb it by adding Sprite. Bottled beer is $5.50, drinks are about $10, tapas are roughly $6-12 and the Paella is about $35. They only have 1 draft beer. One positive is that they have a few large TVs that were easy to see, but instead of playing sound from the football game they had slow depressing music. The restaurant isn't very big either. If you were to compare this place to Firefly, it's no contest, Firefly is considerably better - I'll gladly take my chances with Salmonella. Thank god I had left over pizza to come home to from earlier in the day. Even though I live right next to it, this will definitely be my one and only experience with Toros Spanish Kitchen and Tapas."							
3J94SKDEKI5RORAE7YW2YD5V38QD5P	"I dined here on a Monday by myself at 6pm - it was busy but I was seated at a booth without hesitation.  The menu is vegetarian friendly - I chose to get the half-order of spaghetti with a mixture of marinara and white sauce. While waiting for my entree, I munched on the fresh bread that I dipped in olive oil - mmmmm!  The spaghetti was good - I would have finished it if hadn't eaten the bread.  My waitress was friendly, attentive and efficient.  Yeah, its a chain but for the price point and compared to what's around, you get not only a good deal but good food too."							
3M4KL7H8KV3TF0UGWOMCPHIMA6Z619	"I don't know much about italian food, but this is way better than olive garden! The spaghetti and meatball dish is really yummy! salads and appetizers are good too. portions are really big, even the half orders. I think the half orders are still a pound of pasta. Tiramisu is bomb, too. I'll go back every time I crave some spaghetti."							
3X878VYTIEY39F2TMX6PKXMC6R1F7H	I don't see what the big deal is about this place. Yeah the view is nice and all but the food is pretty average at best. We both had the crab cakes and they were horrible! And the service sucks. We were pretty much ignored the whole time during our meal after the food came.   The bartenders kept giving a women who was all ready clearly drunk more drinks. And she fell on her face right in front of our table and almost knocked it over with no apology from management.  I should've gone to The Capital Grille instead.							
3WGZLY9VCH2AB9TG5W35AXFM5YRD8R	"I eat here about twice a year and love the place. It's above average Italian for a fair price. I generally avoid carbs like the plague, but this place had bomb-diggity salads and wonderful protein options.  I usually order the salmon, either grilled or on a Caesar salad and it's never bad. No, it isn't the best fish you'll ever have but for the price you shouldn't be expecting such things.  I am all about reasonable expectations with food. I'd give the food a 3.5 and the service a 4 in the out-of-five-stars department."							
3XBYQ44Z6PKSIZLVPPJQTH0UQRJWT9	"I found this restaurant by chance as my friends and I were walking down the street from our hotel towards Mirage hotel. At first, we thought it would be very expensive to eat there but since it's at the fashion show mall, we thought we'd stop by and check it out. We were pleasantly surprised to see that the prices were pretty reasonable (except Steaks which cost over $40)  I ordered shrimp scampi with angel hair pasta and I loved it!! it was very light in garlic butter wine sauce and unlike most restaurant, they put a generous amount of shrimp in there, which was awesome! It was a pretty decent sized plate too, but I ended up eating every bit of it! Yumm!   My friends ordered the lasagna and they both loved it too. Good portion, very meaty, cheesy and delicious. (Yes, I had to take a bite for myself!)  We ordered a bottle of chianti for $36 (I think) and it was pretty good and went well with the food.  If you're planning on having at least 2-3 glass, that would be a better option than ordering by the glass which is usually $10/glass.  Above all, our server was really nice, friendly and fun. I think her name is Lori (?)  Their freshly baked bread was soooo good, nice, fluffy and warm. I am not really a big bread eater, especially before my meal, but I ended up eating 3 pieces - dipped in the olive oil vinaigrette and grated Parmesan cheese. Yumm!    We didn't have a reservation so we were told we have a half hour wait. We were waiting for about 15 minutes but  luckily, we found a table at the bar, first come first serve, so we ended up eating at the bar area, which was just fine by us. They serve the full menu there as well.  They have a nice outdoor seating area as well.  I'd recommend that you call and make a reservation if you have a large group or don't want to wait to be seated.  Sooo, Next time I'm in Vegas, I'm definitely going back there, to try out their seafood Linguine!"							
36AZSFEYZ4GF7OR9ZTN97LBUDBGVB7	"I generally am a fan of all IHOPs.  I give this one 4 stars because while it is a dive location, at 3AM they busted out some great fresh food that we all enjoyed.  Yes we were out at a party so you probably think that any food would be good.  Not always the case.   Im a big breakfast lover and their pancakes are always amazing.  Service was quick and great.  Id go here again!"							
34ZTTGSNJX4XTTYEDM3VN9FKRW6QHO	"I generally stay away from chain Italian food.  That being said, the food was not bad.  I had a capresse salad and the tomatoes could have been of slightly higher quality, but otherwise it was ok.  Certainly good enough for a safe tourist meal."							
3FSEU3P2NRGAUORHM64P63RVAR7RRO	"I got talked into going here! If I made the dinner choice I would not have chosen Maggiano's but now after having it I can't wait to go back! I ordered the chicken picatta. The chicken was cooked just right and it had just the right amount of capers.  It came with angel hair pasta that they put in a separate bowel.  I also ordered a side of grilled asparagus.    I have been craving this chicken picatta since I finished eating mine! I was informed there is one in San Jose...I will be checking that one out as well and hope it will be just as tasty!  The restaurant is located at Fashion Show mall.  I'm usually not a big fan of mall food but this was pretty darn good.  Service was slow but they were friendly. There were a lot of people and the wait was around 45 minutes so we decided to head to the bar for seating.  We lucked out and found two bar seats.    Great food, decent service, I would go back!"							
3TC2K6WK9GIN8ZV087JOEEOI873288	"I got there prior to our reservation, so I sat at the bar for a drink, I was ignored for some time, even though there were a few people behind the bar, and the bar stools were half empty, so they weren't busy. Guess they don't like tips. We had a very large group so they had to split us into 2 different tables. They miss counted the seats and left one out, a friend grabbed a chair and added it to the table, but we still had to wait for extra settings and menus. It took a while to get drink orders in, but water was at the tables already. I got an Arnold Palmer with Vodka, it was on the weak side but tasty. A friend got a Coke and said it was flat.  Bread was served with plenty to go around. It was warm, soft and yummy.  I got the Italian Salad, it was very average, the italian vinagrette was quite boring. I ordered the Shrimp and Crab Cannelloni special, which I have had before, it was very good, lots of crab chunks and shrimp. Some friends got the Chicken Parmesean, the portions are huge, but they loved the food as well. No one at our table had a complaint about the food. Most of us skipped desert. Roving musicians entertained us while we digested and others finished up their sweets. Beautiful atmosphere, our waiter was great, food was pretty similar to most italian restaurants around."							
306996CF6W0ZLCBBSF3K0X4EO7A1BP	"I had a Groupon for $40 bucks to spend here so that was a plus. The atmosphere was great nice layout very inviting large big screens showing the games the bartender and waitress super friendly and nice. the food hoever not so nice. We had the garlic shrimp swimming in butter but no flavor, the brava potatoes were decent, the carne asada street tacos were the best part of the meal but the rice and beans were dry with no flavor. We also had the wings and they were eh just tasted  like they were rolled in hot sauce and covered in cheese. I won't be back."							
3MQKOF1EE24L1APY3ZJBODI8N5UWDP	I had an amazing time here tonight! We had our Christmas party and the food was delicious! I especially loved the Apple Crumb with ice cream. It was so good it was sinful!							
3Z8UJEJOCZTC7MATHZ37XKOLYRL93F	"I had dinner here with three co-workers last Wednesday night (1/11/2012). The ambiance was nice and the wait staff very friendly and efficient. We ordered the family style dining option and the appetizers were excellent. We have the Mozzarella Marinara, Spinach & Artichoke al Forno, Garlic Bread Focaccia, and Italian Tossed salad. For dinner we ordered Gnocchi & Italian Sausage, Four-Cheese Ravioli, Baked Rigatoni Pomodoro, and Braised Beef Ravioli. The main dishes were overly sauced and the pasta was over cooked. I could not even eat the gnocchi...it was like eating balls of paste.  This restaurant is highly rated by many on Yelp so it is possible we were just there on a bad night but I will find it hard to return after my last experience. I don't think that anyone in my group was terribly impressed."							
33P2GD6NRN8BIQ0J0HJYRN3BSQFHKO	"I had never been here, but we were doing a combo bachelorette/birthday and this place was awesome.  One waitress was pissed because we were taking a lot of pictures and standing in her way!  OOOOHHHH I'm SCARED - she kept giving us mean looks but WHATEVS.  Getting a group of females together to decided on 2 entrees, 2 salads, 2 apps is like filing your nails down a chalkboard.  Someone has to take control!  I ordered a Reisling and sat back to watch the fireworks show.  With large parties, the restaurant STRONGLY ""suggests"" ok forces you to have family style, which is FINE by me.  It actually works to your advantage because then you aren't squabling over the damn check.  Of course we had one in our party that was a squabbler and a little bit of a pouty puss and was mad when she didn't get her own way.  Well OKAYYYYYY.  So we finally decided on the chopped salad and spiniach salad and the bride is Jewish so we asked for bacon/pork on the side, which was no problem.  The brushetti was awesome, the bread great and the spinach dip was ok, kinda like the frozen kind, just ok.  The ravioli was great!  The waiter even brought me and another girl a sample (large sample) of the pesto with chicken and it was my FAV - we both wanted to order it for the entree, but because of the family style, we couldn't.  Two people wanted to order off the ala carte menu, which they said was fine, as long as at least 6 wanted family style - that built in gratuity is a blessing because at the end of the meal, which was $22.50 per person, I ended up putting in $35 which covered my dinner, wine, tax and tip - couldn't beat it with a stick.  The food is 10000000000 times better than stinky old Buca di Pepto Bismal!!  I highly recommend this place and I'm a picky eater.  LOVE IT"							
3D4BBDG7ZHCE5KHWTJDYZAPT4CO3CQ	"I had no idea that the best meal I would eat in Las Vegas would be at the mall of all places. We had a meal at Craftsteak and I'd trade it for the one we had here any day.  Our server was a tiny, bubbly blonde who I wish I could have put in my pocket and taken home with me. She was sweet and happy and very personable.  We ordered an appetizer of and then I had the fettuccine Alfredo while my husband ordered linguine and clams with the white sauce.   The app was simply prepared and just lovely. My Alfredo was smooth and creamy. It was very flavorful and not oily at all. The linguine was bursting with clams. Nicely prepared with most of the clams tossed in with the pasta and a handful still in shells scattered over top. The wine sauce was fantastic. We also had red wine which was their special house red blend. Also excellent!  We were completely stuffed and declined dessert, but our awesome waitress showed us that they serve little mini desserts for just $2.50... I went with the chocolate cake and my husband got the crem brle. They were both, of course, to die for. So good!  In the end I found myself not wanting to go back to the hotel and leaving the lovely atmosphere (with lots of Frank Sinatra playing in the background) and warm, comfortable interior of the restaurant. It was just lovely.  Like I said, best meal we had the whole trip!"							
3K2CEDRACBHWDNRHLND3KJY3SP4TME	"I had the most amazing time here. The food was perfect, the atmosphere was so romantic and the service was impeccable."							
3LEG2HW4UF3WNE5NGLPUO654VBGF22	"I had the WORST experience at Caldero! We were the ONLY customers in the entire restaurant, but it took forever to get any service. We waited 10 minutes to get our chips, another 10 minutes just for water, another 20 minutes to place our order, and almost an entire hour to get our entrees. We were a large group of 17, but the wait was ridiculous. Good thing I had cash on hand - they probably would have  taken another 20 minutes to run my debit card. Never again will I return to this restaurant!!!"							
3P6ENY9P79CKCVAV0EYME7OY0MPIHD	"I happen to really like this place for breakfeast. I have been going to this location  and the other location for years and always happy with my meal. I used to get the Bubbas Benny which is biscuits and gravy with eggs and potatoes. But now they make it with turkey sausage so I dont get it anymore. Now I get the eggs benidict. Its good and the hollandaise sauce doesnt have a lot of lemon in it. Im not a fan of lots of lemon in my hollandaise. The waffles and french toast here are good as well. This place has burgers, salads, and sandwiches to. Prices are good. $5-10. I dont think they have anything over $10 on the menu."							
3IWA71V4TIW151F93H7JKQMNFLE6X1	"I have always been a fan of Maggiano's. I first went to one of their establishments over 10 years ago in Chicago and have gone to that one probably ten times since. When they opened one in Las Vegas I was happy to go there as well and have frequented it many times since then.   Maggiano's is one of those rare restaurants that overfeeds you meaning they serve huge servings which is very hard to usually finish unless you're super hungry.   On our most recent visit we got Spaghetti and Meatballs, Shrimp Scampi, Chicken Piccata, sauteed spinach, and mashed potatoes. As usual my family had a hard time devouring all the food. My niece was overwhelmed by the huge serving of shrip scampi as was my son with the spaghetti. I was just able to finish off my dish of chicken piccata.   Needless to say that we are fans of Maggiano's and it is always on our list of restaurants to visit when in Vegas."							
3NI0WFPPI9WT8B9Y05ICBCZC5ET606	"I have been going to this place for years. They used to set up a grill outside on Friday and Saturday nights and sell tacos. There would be a huge line and I would go every week but they said the city made them stop doing it.  Still one of the best places in Phoenix for authentic Mexican tacos. I love the tacos, try them all! Shrimp burritos are good also and try the ceviche tostadas.   They have Salcitas all over the valley but for some reason I would drive a bit further to go to this one as they were better. I think it was one of the first ones they built.  This place is ""in da hood"" and most people you will see here speak better spanish than english but if you love authentic Mexican tacos like I do this is a great place to go!"							
3OQQD2WO8IM5IN3WLT9KADNOHH8I37	"I have been here many times, and each time I have been impressed with the restaurant and all it has to offer. The food here is fantastic - I highly recommend the flat breads or caesar salad for an appetizer. Also, you are missing out if you do not order the four cheese ravioli. If you come to the restaurant with a large group, they have a great family style option. However, this option is ONLY AVAILABLE for groups of four or over. Do not waste your calories/money if your group is smaller than this - it is not worth it, and you will have to take food home."							
374UMBUHN55J41FQ8YJPHNTRYB0TCW	"I have been here twice in the last year and both times were amazing. I went with my wife both times and we requested a table with a view, and when we got there we sat right in the corner and we were able to see all the people walking the strip and the cool Wynn sign. The place is huge so it is a great place for large parties as well. If you don't want to take a lot of food home (or back to the hotel room) then just order the 1/2 orders instead and even though it still may be tons of food at least you wont be wasting it. All the drinks are wonderful and the food is great every time we come here. Sure its just like any other Maggianos as far as taste goes but its Vegas so there is a little added something. I talk to the GM of this restaurant like once a month and he is a really nice guy. The staff is great and the views are amazing. If you have not been here..go and if you have been here ...go back.   Peace Out,  MZ"							
3T2HW4QDUVN0KM6CASE8QNSF44Y9CD	"I have been here twice now. First time it seemed expensive so I avoided it for a long time. In search of something different we ventured here again and while it wasn't as expensive as I remember the food just wasn't quite on.   Margaritas: way too much sour. I didn't finish mine. That never happens.   Empanadas: seemed frozen/reheated  Dates: can't go wrong here. Tasty but only 4  Tenderloin from tapas: tasty. Potatoes weren't the real deal but I thought it was good enough. There was something cheap about the steak.   Corn cakes: sugar bomb. I honestly didn't taste anything corn about these guys. They were dressed with maple syrup seemed more like a pancake. The bf enjoyed them so they got a few points.   All in all, tapas are no bueno. I will try one more time because I like the area, but I'll go for an item off the menu -- sandwich or entre."							
3N7PQ0KLI55T2I1APAJTPYPWPO13EJ	I have been here two times and each time was scrumptious! The decor is really cute and they have mason jars at the table holding silverware. Extra point...bc I love mason jars. Now on to the meat of the matter..literally. The oxtail is amazing! The meat is tender and the flavor burst into your mouth with every bite. The dates are good and so is the calamari. I am a girl that loves my sauces and the 3 sauces that come with the calamari are really good. The Sangria is yummy as well. Look for groupon deals so you can get a bang for your buck. Overall...Toros Spanish Kitchen & Gaming will def be in my restaurant rotation!							
33Q5P9PUSP2FQDOPEQ873BU8J7MZCI	"I have been to Maggianos about 3 different times but this last time warrants some shout outs. I graduated and wanted a place to go for my group of 10 friends and family. I found out they also have a happy hour that's offered in the restaurant so I made the reservation.   We were seated right away and our drink orders were taken almost immediately. The group decided to participate in the family style dinner. We had calamari, bruschetta, chopped salad, chicken parm, fettuccine Alfredo, Parmesan crusted tilapia, tiramisu and pound cake. WOOOO!   The best part of our meal was the very attentive and funny Jacob. He always offered us more food but everything was just enough for our group. He kept the drinks a flowing too and made sure this girl was happy, happy on her graduation day."							
3SU800BH8682YF4YDLAU6O4AL48QUP	"I have being here a couple of times , and all experience so we're excellent. .food is delicious , atmosphere is great. .love the complimentary bread..fettuccine to die for..definitely my place to eat when I shop at fashion show"							
3M67TQBQQH4CR79EQEIHKS2R41CA9B	I have come here multiple times on trips to the area. Service has always been great and the food is top notch. On the last trip I ordered the Chicken Fajitas and they were great. I would say it is a must try.							
3BVS8WK9Q0BALI790MOQSWL059LBIR	"I have eaten in restaurant only a handful of times.  The service is friendly but lacking.  Now, I only eat here if it is catered at work and even then if I haven't brought my lunch into the office.  The vegetables are always overcooked, mushy and taste oily.  The chicken is always over done.  The beef is gristly and flavorless.  The sauces on the food, and the ones on the side, are gloppy and thick, often oily and often flavorless.  The egg rolls are small and greasy, maybe they need to drain them more before serving?   The good parts:  I don't pay for the lunch when it is catered at work, but like I said...I still only eat this if I didn't bring my own lunch for some reason and the fortune cookies!"							
38B7Q9C28GLB45XB01154N058IN69I	"I have had annoying visits with the Fridays in the past, but I decided to give it another try. I am pleased I did. I came in with my boyfriend for apps and drinks before a Tuesday movie.   The Service: Very fast and the server was very friendly.  The Drinks: Exactly what I expected The Food: YUM. We shared their new ""tapas"" menu. I LOVED the Mac bites. My boyfriend cant wait to try their meatballs again.  The Price: $40, not great but not bad either.   The only downfall? I was too full for a whiskey cake for dessert."							
3IH9TRB0FBF98KPHYPV1MK8RJXU1IY	I have never ever had a bad meal here! The spicy garlic eggplant is to DIE for!!! Love it! The potstickers are yummy as well!							
3E6L1VR4XW2K5FOO3N1XEJMGBGI6FA	"I have no idea how this place is ranked so high. Everything that we ordered before the main course was bland;salad, ""saffron"" chicken, bacon wrapped dates, calamari. All had no taste. The chicken tasted like chicken soup base with boiled chicken. The worst offender was our main course, the seafood paella.   For a $36 shared entree you would expect something tasty that you can't wait to go back again for, but it was awful. the paella was. It honestly tasted like rancid vegetable oil with boiled vegetables and mushy rice. I couldn't find any chorizo or chicken which would have added flavor. The seafood was there, but guess what? Totally lacking in any kind of seasoning. The clams were also full of sand and it was very unpleasant having spit out grains of and with each bite. I actually am getting pissed off thinking about this because our check was pretty damn high. We actually left a little hungry because we didn't want to finish the main course."							
3W31J70BASCK1IP3EP5XGW6VFYAKCI	"i haven't been to maggiano's for about 5 years.  but it still has the same solid food.    *this location is inside the fashion show mall* *they only serve the dinner menu...no lunch specials*  we came for a light lunch at the bar at 1pm.  maggiano's actually fit the bill because we shared the following: a italian toss side salad and an order of spaghetti meatballs.  hubby had beer on draft which came in a tall (but skinnier than usual) glass.  italian toss side salad - we opted for the side salad portion simply because we didn't       want leftovers.  romaine lettuce, arugula, red onions, tomatoes, croutons,       peppercinis with a light viniagrette dressing  spaghetti meatballs - rather MEATBALL, no s.  it was a big meatball though.        spaghetti was a smaller portion than expected.  however, it was perfect for our       purposes.  i love to add red pepper flakes in my pasta.  the lady working the bar area did a great job taking orders, serving, etc."							
30OITAWPBQJR1UHSWKS91EPVHW3H9U	"I haven't gone to a Maggiano's in a long time, first time in the Vegas location too.  I made a reservation on the phone for 6:30pm, we got there by 6pm so I asked them if we could be seated.  They were still pretty empty at that time except at the bar where they had happy hour so they sat us in a nice booth seat.  Our waitress wasn't particularly friendly but she did provide good service overall.  She didn't go over the specials either but no problem since I can read it myself.    Ordered the half order spinach salad (I always forget to ask them to leave the dressing on the side.  Did it again this time too and they put way too much).  I remember it tasting a little better but it's probably because there was too much dressing.  I do love my grilled veggies and bacon in it though.  Also ordered the calamari.  It was okay but I wish the marinara was spicy because it tasted kind of plain.  The warm bread with the olive oil and balsamic was yummy.    I only ordered two pastas for three people (waitress said all their dishes are now ""half order"" sized).  Thank goodness I did too because the portions were still pretty big, plus I was already more than half-full from the appetizers and bread.  Got the pesto chicken linguine and the seafood linguine.  The pesto chicken linguine had a ton of pesto, a little too much but when I reheated it the next day, it was so good.  The seafood linguine had a good amount of seafood and the tomato sauce kept it from getting heavy.  We took back over 2/3 of each of the pasta dishes because we were too full by then, even for dessert.    Although the waitress wasn't talkative with us, she refilled our water, checked up on us, and gave me two little rolls of ciabatta breads when I asked her to box the few pieces left to go along with our pastas.  Good service and she was well rewarded with a nice tip."							
3UXQ63NLAA2CBJFFLPL3KCDSMDELBE	"I heard good things about this place so I went with a friend, it was jam packed there and it took us a bit to get a table but it was well worth the wait. I got the lobster carbonara which I could not get through granted I had a salad and bread, you get a good portion size which is nice. I recommend making a reservation before going here for dinner, there is a reason it is packed, its on the strip and the food and atmosphere are great. Nice place."							
3MDWE879UHIHAHE6WSIDF3MXMJYB98	"I held my wedding reception at Maggiano's.  Beth and Sabrina were so patient with me, and they worked with me to help plan everything. I'm from Canada and had no idea who to use for anything that I needed, so they gave me a list and I went from there.  Everything was perfect. All of my guests were well fed and happy with the event, and commented all night on how great the service and food was.   The family style dinner isn't something anyone had seen at a wedding before, and we all thought that was great. We were a small group of 20, and we decided to have everyone seated at one long table, and that was perfect.  All in all, my wedding was perfect thanks to Beth and Sabrina and the rest of the staff at Maggiano's, and I couldn't be more thankful."							
33CLA8O0MIRDRYM8VB4VPEDC73WRFT	I honestly feel that this place was overrated. I always get people that tell me that this place was awesome which I don't agree. Its also overpriced for what they give you a dinner for two here is a hundred bucks. I feel like I can get more for my money somewhere else sorry to be blunt but I eat out alot so if Im going to spend that kind of money I should feel satisfied right?							
3CZH926SICUEKEKEPOOCZ3H23OX4E5	"I just love Maggiano's. Not usually a fan of big chains, but I just love them. I have one close to where I live and ate there only because we had been given a gift certificate.   While in Vegas with my family, I insisted we have a big family meal at Maggiano's. We made reservations for 7:30 on a Tuesday night.   We arrived on time, but had to wait more than thirty minutes to be seated. The place was totally packed, so we had to stand, smashed together, in the bar area while we waited. That sucked, and made me wonder why we bothered with reservations.  Our server was extremely busy (there was an 18 top in our section), but he did a fantastic job, considering how busy he was, and how many questions and picky orders my family came up with.  The food was fantastic. I ordered the spinach artichoke appetizer and the eggplant parmesan. Everyone at the table absolutely loved the spinach artichoke. However, we prefered it on the table bread, as opposed to the ""crostini"" it's served with. The little pieces of crostini are too small and too hard for the yummilicious, creamy, piping hot, rich spinach artichoke dip.   My eggplant parm was beautiful and delicious. Unfortunately, in total vegas style, it was enormous. A small family could have shared it (I have a big family....haha). It was just perfect. I'm not used to whole pieces of roasted garlic in my eggplant parm, but they were delightful little treats to discover here and there. It couldn't have been better, honestly. Four meals came out of it- the one that night, a midnight snack later, my meal on the plane the next day, and my husband's lunch the next day. It was even delicious cold!  For desert, my sister ordered the 5 desert platter. It had tiramisu, cheesecake, chocolate cake, apple pie ala mode, and....I can't remember the last one. It was so pretty- and only $9.95. The whole table shared it, and we still had leftovers. I'm not a fan of sweets, so I only nibbled a couple things. My sister said it was the best cheesecake she'd ever had.  All in all, it was a fantastic night. I remember sitting back for a moment, looking around the table... everyone was laughing, eating, and having a wonderful time."							
3RWO3EJELHP1P6CLBKLLVH935BP1PA	"I know this is not an authentic Italian place, but some of their dishes are just the BOMB. Like the Rigatoni D - omg and their Penne with meat sauce - I don't know... I just love love love it. It so hits the spot.   I make crazy good pasta sauces all the time so I am a skeptic but sometimes even the commercialized stuff can be tasty."							
3T2EL38U0M0UFJYTIQLHQV3EFMPQXH	"I know this place is a chain restaurant but that doesn't stop it from having delicious food! As you would expect from any decent Italian place the prices are a little high and being right in the fashion show mall doesn't help. Overall the food is great and the atmosphere is what you expect for what your paying.   Now for my favorite part about this place. They have something called a Family style dinner. To order this you are required a party of 4. The cost is about $35 per person and completely worth it! This includes the following: two appetizers,two salads, two pastas, two entrees and a desert. Now you might be thinking wow that's a rip off? BUT WAIT there is more to this then meets the eye. All the items have to be selected off the pre-build family menu BUT the portions are UNLIMITED!! for instance if you order 2 appetizers and you greatly enjoy them tell the server and he will bring you another order of them. Same goes with the salad, pasta and everything else. The kicker here is that you ALSO get to take home your leftovers!  I would recommend this place to anyone who enjoys Italian food! My personal favorite dish is the following.  Four Cheese Ravioli + Ravioli stuffed with ricotta cheese, cream cheese, mozzarella, and provolone filling sprinkled with house cheese, then browned in the oven and served in pesto-alfredo cream sauce with a touch of marinara.   It is AMAZING! It also always puts a smile on my face :)"							
3GS542CVJV3FL1XXVIR0CHM5CNC955	"I know what to expect coming in to a place like this, food wise, but I wasn't prepared for how filthy it was.  The booth we sat in, right in front by the hostess stand, was just caked with crud on the walls.  Just sitting there made me feel dirty...but we were hungry, it was late, so we stayed.  The service was absolutely the WORST I have ever experienced.  Anywhere.  Our (frumpy) waitress never refilled our drinks, I had to chase down the hostess to get another round.  We waited about 50 minutes for our food to come out, and it was typical Friday's salty nosh.  The chicken with cheese was ok, although my ankles were swollen in the morning (as usual when I eat at Friday's the night before) due to the saltiness of their food.   After having to watch the degenerate gamblers and obnoxious loud fat people stroll in and out of there all night, we wanted to leave.  The waitress gave us our bill then disappeared.  I tried to flag her down, but we waited at least 15 more minutes.  We got fed up, counted out enough money to leave for the bill, and were even generous enough to leave her a $.17 cent tip.  I normally leave at least a 20% tip, even for crappy service, but crappy sevice is better than NO service.  This place needs better management..."							
3S4TINXCC03KH4ICYH1VCTHMHIKBOM	"I like this place, the service is excellent. They have a full bar, the flat bread is good start, also the calamari. The lobster carbonara is great i also the seafood pasta is good. I tasted the salmon as well. i think i will order that next time. one thing you should do is call ahead for reservations. This will save you some headaches waiting. Also allow a extra 15 minutes get through the strip traffic and parking."							
36818Z1KV3TQC5KY95H7TFZ5492A3U	"I liked First Watch. It's not as nice as the one at The Promenade, but it's quaint, and that's how breakfast should be in my opinion.   I thought the food here was great. There's usually a 5-10 minute wait on a weekend morning, which isn't so bad. I went here with my mom and we both enjoyed the food and our server was very social and friendly, and we all had a laugh. Prices are reasonable too."							
3ODOP6T3AS0MPY8YW4TBX28D6L7423	"I live across the street from here and for 6+ months have been telling myself I would stop in ... I finally did and I was pleased!!  The bf and I popped in for a late lunch/early dinner and the place was empty (4pm on a Saturday) which we found a little odd, but sat down at the bar anyway.  Bf had the Calderita (a margarita with jalapeno infused tequila) it was too spicy for me, but he liked that it wasn't overly sweetened like other margs. I had the strawberry mojito which was nice and not overly sweet either. the bartender brought us out some chips, salsa and some green chile dip while we waited for food. Chips didn't appear to be homemade, but I didn't care because that warm green dip was so good! I coulda put it on cardboard and been happy.  ;) I wasn't super hungry so I just ordered the ""small nachos"" with chicken. This is $5 at full price and I wasn't expecting the mass pile of food that was placed in front of me. Everything you want in a nacho was there... Lots of cheese, black beans, lots of succulent shredded chicken, pico, guac and sour cream. Love-love-loved it! I over ate and left way too full. The bf had the chicken mole and he claimed it to be his new official favorite mole. Their mole is a family recipe and he made sure to give compliments to the chef!  He got 2 sides with his entree and one of his choices was a lemon-cilantro rice... I of course had to try this.... Matter of fact, I tried about 4 bites cuz it was so good! The bartender said they do a happy hour all day on Sunday, so I'm thinking the next time I get a wild hair and bar-hop on Sunday, I have to work them into rotation!"							
3UZUVSO3P7BUO49KVSO8LXY2PFIEMA	I live around the corner from this place and was disappointed. More on the expensive side for what it actually is. Came at 11 when it was supposed to open and had to wait awhile before they actually did.  When the server finally came out she made eye contact but said nothing.  It has so much potential but with the service and price it's just a disappointment.  Just about anything else could be better and it's too bad anything else isn't in this shopping center.  I swear  Toros and john cutters only stay in business due to the prime location.							
35YHTYFL1GJ5K53P4V95QB2FS98VFP	"I live right near here, had seen it go up and never went to it.  Randomly decided to take the lovely special lady friend out to dinner and chose this place.  Needless to say, we were both very impressed.  The service was outstanding and friendly, the food was outstanding (we shared one of the huge Paella dishes - fresh and outstanding), and had a few drinks and a salad.  Pretty damn pricey, but nice to eat well and not have to be super decked out, naw'mean?  The live music is a really nice touch and the overall vibe of the place is great.  Definitely not the kind of place I'd go to every weekend, but for special occasions it is awesome."							
3EKZL9T8Y82TZSOV842034Q3NH5CH5	I love a good Gyro and this place makes them AMAZING! I ordered a traditional Gyro to go and was out the door in less than 5 minutes (good for my lunch break). I plan on going again for lunch today!							
38LRF35D5LCAREYWFAYYTGBZBCV3U0	"I love breakfast, and First Watch does it right.  I had a hard time deciding because there were so many healthy options, along side heartier food.  Service was good.  I'll be back!"							
3511RHPADVUZRQW4HM7TKRIW4ZIRLY	"i LOVE LOVE LOVE Maggiano's. I've been to three of their locations, and most recently the Las Vegas one again.  My bf and I arrived around 8 on a Saturday night, and thankfully only waited about 15 minutes to be seated. I had been starving myself since the morning in anticipation of this meal. We took the first available, which was outside and I wouldn't recommend it. It's not Maggiano's fault, but there was an iPod commercial running on a continuous loop on one of the outdoor televisions at the mall. Even with the ambient noise, and the restaurant's own music, by the time we were done with dinner, I was ready to jab a fork in both of my ears. That being said, I still had a great dinner!   I've never been disappointed with the food nor service, and this time was no different. Our waiter was very nice and attentive and helped us pick out a really good bottle of wine.  We started with the fried mozzarella with marinara sauce... yummm.  The Maggiano salad has a great light flavored dressing and little bits of prosciutto in it.... so tasty! And for the main course we shared my favorite dish on the face of this planet, the chicken and spinach manicotti. Words just cannot do this dish justice, suffice it to say it's freakin fabulous.   I somehow mustered the courage to order desert, even though my stomach was filled to the max. But I just absolutely love their cheesecake. I am NOT a big fan of cheesecake, but Maggiano's makes theirs with mostly marscapone cheese and it is just wonderful!   So if you are in Vegas and looking for some overly generous portioned great food I highly recommend Maggianos!"							
359AP8GAGG0W63IJVVGOCR199EA7CZ	"I love Maggiano's!! It is great for big parties. My family and I are a huge fan of the Family Style Lunch.   http://www.maggianos.com/foodbeverage/default.asp?menu=Family%20Style%20Lunch  You get two choices of appetizers, salads, pastas, entrees and desserts. They also refill the plates. So if you finish your appetizer, they'll give you another one and if you don't finish it they let you box it up.   My favorites are the Calamari Fritte, Stuffed Mushrooms and the Tiramisu!!!  Everyone in the world needs to celebrate one event in their life at Maggiano's. It is totally worth the price."							
36BTXXLZ2VO3TIPJBU8CYAGLIDN4RI	I love Maggianos. I can't get enough of the Famous Rigatoni D. & they have the best calamari. I am also in love with the marinara sauce they use for the spaghetti as well as the chicken parmesan. Friendly staff & usually not very crowded when I come here. & I feel like I'm in the 1940s with the music they play. Definitely one of my favorite places to eat.							
374UMBUHN55J41FQ8YJPHNTRYB0CTF	"I love TGIF ever since but I never wrote a review.  The food is good, the dessert is not to miss and their happy hour on drinks is cherry on top.  This one inside The Orleans is great place to dine after or before going to the movies or bowling (or to gamble for the gamblers)."							
30QQTY5GMK0SSXZJHM1O6XNFGEHU7W	"I love the ambiance here, and sometimes if you want the Vegas Strip, but not the feeling of chaos, this is the place to be. Lunch on the patio is fantastic, and is quite a unique people watching scene. I love their salads, wine menu and chicken marsala.  Usually, the service is great and the kitchen is consistent.  Be careful of the following:Their salads are spot on, but their house dressing  is on the sweeter side.  I personally prefer the italian which is homemade but not nearly as sweet.  Also, if you are not a fan of shaved chicken breast, then you should avoid adding chicken to your salads. It is not your usual chunky  breast.   This establishment is way better than your typical Italian chain, and has incredible  family portions. Salute' to Maggiano's-you keep me coming back for more."							
3L21G7IH47CVYK4M27H4882F9GS1Y4	"I love the food here but this experience wasn't as great as it was in the past. I made a reservation and when we arrived we were told that there weren't any tables available. It wasn't even that busy! But we waited patiently for about 20 minutes so that wasn't horrible. And then our cocktails took at least 20 minutes to arrive at the table. Once we ordered, my soup came out eventually. I had two bites and then the entrees came out. By the time I finished my soup, the cheese on my pasta was no longer hot. Gross. Overall it wasn't a terrible experience, but the previous times were much better. I guess that's why I gave the 3 stars. It wasn't terrible... Just made my eye twitch"							
3RQVKZ7ZRKZJ8LQHY2RI0ESNXNX27L	"I love the food here. It is really worth the price, which really isn't bad for the quality or quantity.   I have been here twice and the only down side was the service. Our first server was decent, yet our second server was unobservant, and somewhat rude."							
39HYCOOPKO1PWYVKZXDOFFGHP3HMDP	"I love the Maggiano's in my home town, so I thought why not in vegas!? It's right across from my hotel and I know the food is awesome.  Everything was great until we walked back to our hotel and took a nap. We all woke up feeling super sick.   But lemme talk about the actual experience in the restaurant. It was a super long wait for 5pm but we got hooked up and passed the line. We were seated and everything was brought in a timely manner. The food was the same as always and it wasn't better or worse than any other Maggiano's I've been to except for the part where we all got sick.   Oh well."							
3LAZVA75NI7QTRIGFO8KB0EINC6O2W	"I love this place, they have the best Italian food I can find here in Vegas and their prices are pretty reasonable. I always bring my friends from out of town who come to visit here and they always like it. Get your Italian on!"							
3J9L0X0VDF29YKCHRJE92HZIWKF9WL	"I love this place! I've been here a few times now with co-workers, and everytime I come, I leave with leftovers and content with my experience.  The service is great and fast (important for those on a time budget), the food is really good, I enjoy the Mongolian Beef and Kung Pao Chicken, and the prices are very affordable - $6 to $8 for the lunch special.   It's definitely worth a try!"							
37VUR2VJ6A5IVH3H6FZFBHAW6SAC17	"I love this place! My first visit was a few years ago after my brother-in-law said my husband and I HAD to go. I make my share if trips to Las Vegas and I go out of my way to eat at Maggiano's. The decor is very nice. Love the dark wood and old Vegas pictures. The look of the place gives an impression of a much more expensive restaurant but I think the prices are very reasonable compared to some other local restaurants. The service is always great and I've always enjoyed everything I've ordered. My favorite is the Tuscan Sausage and Orzo soup, I order it every time! A must for every Vegas trip!"							
3CZH926SICUEKEKEPOOCZ3H23OXE4F	"I love this place. I came here with a large group and we were served family style with so many delicious entrees but this place had already won me over before the food came.The restaurant has a glass wall and if you sit in the right corner you can see the fashion show mall, wynn las vegas, and even down the north end of the strip. I loved watching the Wynn sign change colors and move as I ate and enjoyed great cocktails. The food was authentic Italian food and vey filling. Delicious. We had a ravioli that was too die for. A lemon chicken with capers, I think. There was also like a lasagna or something. I don't know but everything was good and just really above average. The girl sitting next to me hated seafood and wouldn't try a few things so she kept complaining but seriously grow up and eat some damn fish! This place is great. The atmosphere is homey and a little cheesy with Italian music playing. The lighting was dark and the table cloths where red and white checkered. I loved everything about this restaurant!"							
3BKZLF990ZFJFOO3NM7J99ANHSJYQV	"I love this place. I had sourdough french toast with kiwi, strawberries, bananas, and blueberries with a side of eggs ($1.59 for an egg? Really? I can buy a dozen for that much!)  Anyway, pricy eggs aside, it was SO DELICIOUS. I ate the entire thing, even every last crumb of fruit. I loved it. It was reasonably priced, I got unlimited tea refills, and the server was just the cutest thing I've ever seen. It was like a very very nice and quaint version of denny's in terms of layout, not a lot of trendy indie stuff or whatever, but i loved it."							
30ZKOOGW2WMU226JM13O5MK86POA12	"I love this place. The enviroment, decor and food.  Gnocchi in tomato vodka sauce and Chicken pesto are my favorite..  Clam with linguine was just a mediocre. It's a place I would go once or twice a month."							
3BFF0DJK8XSZBI4M5K9PWSX9KEMSTP	"I love this place. The tapas selection was so yummy I couldn't decide. Omar, our waiter brought my husband & I his choices. OMG absolutely perfect. First was bacon wrapped dates. Then pil pil shrimp, oxtail, a little later was ahi tuna & tenderloin with Brie. Jalapeo margaritas are a must have and the sangria is heavenly."							
391JB9X4ZYOXA41UREZBJSB79CEKM0	"I love this restaurant- casual elegant, and everything on the menu is fantastic!  We bring friends here when they're in town and always remind them to save room for dessert.  The service is always great too- love this place and highly recommend it!"							
3PCPFX4U406DFX78IWFVKO37BHTQFQ	"I love when chain restaurants can still produce homemade tasting items and provide excellent service. Their seasonal breakfast items, iced coffees (with to go cups!), and friendly staff will have me coming back."							
3O0M2G5VC6IXPITXHD8Q7PGRCRH49V	I loved maggiano's when I lived in Chicago so the one in vegas reminds me of home! The food is consistently good. The service was great. The portions are out of control but hey I get lunch the next day.  I recommend you make reservations or you will be at the bar waiting!!!							
3HJ1EVZS2OZIBM6FBG3TO5OF4DR3RW	"I made a reservation on open table and parking was really close and easy. We were seated right away and were blown away by the family style option. Two appetizers, two, salads, two pastas, two entrees and two desserts..all of it is unlimited refills. really awesome food, good wine, nice atmosphere, exceptional service. I will dream about this meal."							
3DQYSJDTYLR5IG8O9ZQHWEE0WJ2EXU	"i mean, it's just average. lots of old people. lots of regulars.  i wish i could give 5 stars solely for our waitress. in fact, i'm going to write the manager to tell them about our awesome waitress. seriously, who cares about the food. i want to be her bff4l, she was so damn nice. apparently everyone loves her bc the regular oldies were hugging her and she knew them all by name. i have NEVER had such a great waitress. for sure, the best, ever.   the food was neither here nor there...just typical breakfast stuff... but i would go back just to hang out with my new bff4l. i wish i knew her name, but if you go here just ask for the blonde girl that everyone loves, you will love her too. and you will also want to be her bff4l."							
3L84EBDQ37I2KG1R62MV4FJ3K7IKKU	"I moved here from NY about six years ago and it's SUPER difficult to find a great authentic NY style pizza. Madison does Chicago style like a champ, but finding the real deal out here is not easy.  AJ's took over when Falbo's closed down... and they are nailing it.  Whenever I ordered from the more well-trafficked places, like Glass Nickel, I always had to tell them 3 things: mozzarella cheese, not a blend; thin crust; and well done. That's the closest I could get to a real NY pizza.  AJ's does that, without being asked to. Never got a soggy crust, never got too much sauce or too little sauce. I've ordered from AJ's about eight times now. The crust is freaking heavenly, and exactly how I remember - a little al dente due to good, long kneading, and stiff enough on the bottom to fold in half. Honestly AJ's crust is the best part of their pizza, even if they could stretch it a tiny bit thinner.  They use real dry mozzarella, which gets the bite just perfectly NY. If I have any complaints, and I do have just the one, it's that the sauce they use is consistently just a tiny bit too salty, but you'd never notice it unless you put pepperoni or sausage on the pie."							
38RHULDV9YV29L5KVDKMFAYLFA2WIR	"I normally would've given Maggiano's a 3 star rating, but they earned an extra star for dealing with our pain in the ass party! Long story short, 17 of my closest girlfriends and I visited Vegas. We made the reservation, then made our choices for appetizer, salad, entree, and dessert. We showed up 45 minutes late on a Saturday night. I was having panic attacks the entire way to the restaurant because I WORK in a busy restaurant, and I know the repercussions of being almost an hour late with a party of 18 on a Saturday night. They were very patient, and we had an amazing private room...it was in a wine closet. So fun! Our waiter was awesome. The food was okay...typical Italian (upscale) chain fare."							
3M7OI89LVY4D234ECLBW6D1DE3QC65	"I ordered take out.  Four cheese ravioli with pesto Alfredo.  I drove home and to my dismay my pasta was covered in marinara. I called and the manager answered.  He was very kind and said he would start the correct order right away.  He explained the dish is garnished in marinara.  However I did not read that in the description and dislike tomato sauce.  As soon as I returned to the restaurant they replaced the pasta. I was frustrated I had to drive all the way back, but they gave really great service."							
3RBI0I35XEJR8NI1PBVNW1HC705Y3S	"I pretty much only come here to treat my son.  So I took my son here because he loves to play in the kids playground area which is pretty neat for youngsters.  The food just isn't what I used to think when I was younger.  The fries are generally pretty good, unless you get served some cold fries which is disgusting.  I had the double quarter w/cheese + bacon.  It was pretty good, but the burgers are not served HOT like many other fast food places.  I would like to see the cheese melted to my bun from the heat.  Service was pretty much exactly what I would expect, nothing too great, but nothing to complain about either."							
3RHLQY6EDTK9S86ETTDSTLZH3CW4DC	"I really enjoy the food here. I ordered to take out because I didn't wanna eat by myself and look all weird at an upscale restaurant...that's just no.  Service on the take out was quick simple and easy, by the time I got to the cashier, the man was already there, it was a big guy and had a healthy complexion. I was going to receive change but I told the guy to keep it since he was there ready for me.  Italian food vs. italian food; Way better than olive gardens old bland food (i'll check them out again though since they did try to change for the better), 5 times better! I only got one dish just to try and check the food out.   *Chicken & Spinach Manicotti, full of flavor! Chicken had a natural chicken flavor with slight seasoning, the spinach wasn't overbearing and just helped compliment the dish, texture had a slight crisp and softness to it which had a really fine balance, it was superb in my opinion. Not too salty or dry. The ricotta cheese and alfredo sauce blends in perfectly, although the ricotta was just a tad on the stronger side.  I'll definitely be coming back."							
3L55D8AUFADFLNEKI46OP4L6DDIYCQ	"I really enjoyed the food and service, excellent food but I do agree with other reviewer about the music.  Music makes a huge difference while you are dining, and in the case of this restaurant continuous classic rock does not match the food served. Literally I want to go in, have excellent food and get out ASAP, because the music is draining. Hope they change it or mix it at least!!"							
31HLTCK4BLBBY5ZKFFFN8W2RTO8VGO	"I really like the deco of this place, but the service and quality of the food didn't justified what I had to pay.  We had to remind our waiter two out of five orders did not come.  Food quality was average.  I live one mile away of this tapas, wouldn't go there again."							
3OZ4VAIBEXVLP7PLNL0Q59U7LGQJVH	"I really like this place for breakfast.  There is almost never a wait for a table, even on Saturday morning.  The food and service is reliable.  There are some healthy options on the menu as well as some very not healthy options (which we all sometimes need and want for breakfast).  One of my close friends introduced me to this restaurant years ago.  As it is downtown, it was awfully out of my way to go again.  But, I always thought of it fondly.  Now, that I am only minutes from downtown - I think I will be getting here more often.  I'm almost glad that there are several poor reviews on yelp because it secures my ability to wander in and get a table whenever I please! :)"							
371QPA24C24ZHY5SS1U50RA0UE9T16	"I really really wanted to love this place. It looked great from the outside and walking in, the decor was well done. It is clean and inviting. However, although we were the only two customers in the entire store during lunch hour, the service was still very slow. The food was overpriced and not very good.  At the end of our lunch we waited quite a while and no one brought the check. Finally my friend just got up to find an employee. I will say that I don't gamble or drink so I can't rate those items."							
3E24UO25QZ6EBS1H2QKN1DVU3H96OW	"I think if you go to Arby's you know what you are getting into and compared to some of the other Arby's it's pretty good. Granted, it's never going to be perfect, this is fast good not fine dining.  I have received under cooked fried foods, and some dishes are overly spicy. Limit menu, i'd rather go else where, but for what it is, this place is decent."							
3R5LWXWHR0O32U4FFUG5WHZC9ZHGXD	"I think T.G.I. Friday's is a fine establishment, especially for chain restaurants. But this spot is terrible. I've been here twice and have been thoroughly disappointed. The first time my problem was with the service. It took forever to be seated and to be served. The second time it was with the food. My wings were undercooked and my well done cheeseburger was pink. Then my date's well done burger was pink also, by that point she didn't even want to send it back because we already sent two things back. And on top of that the waitress took forever to return with the bill. I know some casino restaurants are crappy because they don't rely on repeat business and make it up with volume. But this one is pathetic. I will not be back to this one."							
351S7I5UG9C8H2GCLUEZVS0UZDNNJ3	"I took my dad here for breakfast when he came into town for the morning. I actually took him here based solely on the location because it was close to my house.  The food is ok, I had the ""traditional"" breakfast with scrambled eggs, turkey sausage and potatoes.  The egg were just ok, didnt really have flavor and were kind of dry, I wonder do they add milk to their eggs?"							
3MD8CKRQZZ3TW084E1VG4C540ADJRO	"I tried to go here last night; party of five.  The hostess told us that it would be an hour and 45 minutes before we could be seated, even though there were only a couple of people waiting and there were a few tables inside and all but two tables outside were being used.  No problem, we went downstairs to RA and had a great meal."							
3M0556243S0SC0UG24NEGU82666NF0	"I used to come here quite often and really enjoyed it. However, something happened and they really went down hill. I went there again about 3 weeks ago after not going there for years and it was really good. So we went there again this week. Again really good, the food has greatly improved!  Everything  once again was delicious and the service was fantastic.  I am so glad that they got it together again. They are only open for Breakfast and lunch. But, i love that they are right here in the neighborhood."							
3NSM4HLQNRAA6MXHWCQPWN7LIJ2QQK	I used to go here all the time after school! (one of the many great perks of living in vegas.) The prices are decent and the servings are huge!! Their stuffed mushroom is superb!! This place is great for that little pick-me-up after a day of shopping at the Fashion Show mall!  Their service is amazing too!							
3I01FDIL6MOZPURRPFU4062JJYZD2O	"I used to go to First Watch once a week and I strongly recommend this place.  The pancakes are to die for and the service is first rate.  It i one of the few breakfast places that keeps it real with the sausage, and serves it up many ways (links, patties, chorizo, etc).  One of my favorite places in the valley."							
389A2A304OYIOSIZAWVFXCRM104C04	I usually come to Maggiano's if I want decent Italian food. Not anything amazing like you would find in other cities. I have noticed that the only difference of lunch and dinner are the prices but the same portion? Very interesting. Usually the lunch portion would be way smaller but I really could not tell the difference. The party/family style is definitely NOT worth the price. I do admit that Maggiano's is probably not even comparable to Bucca but still they overprice their food too much when I could probably get the same thing at a small family owned business. It doesn't help that it's on the strip. The service is great! Make sure if you go on a holiday or a very busy weekend to make reservations! The portions are great but the quality...hmm....I'm the type that prefers quality over quantity.							
3MDWE879UHIHAHE6WSIDF3MXMJY9B6	I usually eat at the Fridays on Sahara but tried this one out last night because I was seeing a movie at the Orleans.  I have been here before and usually have a bad experience but this time was different I actually had a good time.  We were sat immediately which is rare on a Saturday night at dinner time. Our server immediately greeted us and brought our drinks out right away. We ordered the Fried Green beans which came out hella fast and were delicious as always.   I ordered the Jack Daniels Pulled Pork Sandwich which was tasty as always and my son had the kids pizza with fries and he scarfed that down.  Overall this time I had a great experience service was good and food was delicious.							
3NBFJK3IOHYG8LQNE3T9D48JXVCGO8	"I usually like Maggiano's, especially when I come with a big group.   The view from this location is great, because it's right above the Strip, so you can see everything around the Wynn, which is right across the street.   The host staff was polite, the food was quick, but our server was NONE OF THE ABOVE! He basically did everything short of rolling his eyes at us.   What a mood killer. And meal killer. And Maggiano's killer."							
3B286OTISEX1XJMNCQ9U9MGU06PJAG	"I visit Las Vegas three times or more per year, and ever time we have to stop and eat at Maggiano's. It reminds me of some of the old Italian Restaurants back East. It's Italian comfort food and the service is excellent. Last year my wife and I celebrated our 30th Wedding Anniversary and we booked our dinner at Maggiano's. The waiter was not only attentive, but engaging. He interacted so well with everybody from my 90year old mother to my 4 year old grandchildren. The food was great."							
3IV1AEQ4DRTNEVT8FSPGDVAZAIPJ8C	"I visited this place a couple of years ago on the recommendation of my friend Missy.  she loves the Newport Location, so I was willing to try it out.    AMAZING!!!  I make it a point to east here when in vegas.  This might sound strange, but they have one of the BEST Crab Cake appetizers in the world.  I have ordered this as my main course and nibbled on my husbands food on a few occasions.  The portion size is HUGE.  We have done the Family Style meal and it was simply too much food.  We could not keep up!!!  All in all, the location is nice, the food is great and the location is convenient."							
3X0EMNLXEP5HBISJIY5A25GJUFVPVM	"I walked in for a coffee today. I was looking a little more scrubby than normal and figured that the normal patrons and staff of McDonalds might be a little more understanding than a coffee house. I ordered a single iced coffee, paid, and waited at a table opposite the registers. At the time I was the only one there, but shortly after about 10 people got in line. I waited. And waited. And waited. No coffee? I thought that maybe they'd just needed to get their drive customers out of the way before moving on to my ticket. But people after me started receiving their food. 15 minuted after ordering a SINGLE COFFEE I waited through line and handed my receipt to the cashier. She said they must have skipped me and went to give the ladies my ticket by hand. Another 5 minutes later I had my coffee and was on my way. Sorry, McDonalds, I am not interested in waiting 20 minutes for a coffee."							
3IZPORCT1FPX5UDEQ1SVSZPPNI8HRG	"I was craving pasta for dinner after the crap I ate at Todd English's Olives, so we wandered over from the Wynn and found this place. Stuffed mushrooms were amazing! The spinach salad was really good and the lobster ravioli was good. It had big chunks of lobster in it, but the cream sauce could have been better.. still yummy though."							
3DA79LNS59BVR1J7F58OOKPXSYNT3Y	"I was dissatisfied with this place after reading all the rave reviews. We ordered for 3. Pork fried rice, lemon chicken, and sweet and sour chicken.  Pork fried rice was way over-cooked. Chewy flavorless pork and little rice rocks were in abundance. It really had no flavor at all. It is hard to mess up this dish, but somehow, they did.   Sweet and sour chicken. When you open the container and the veg is burnt, we have a problem. Hard over battered and over fried pieces of dry chicken were placed strategicly throughout the box. The sauce... well its sauce alright. Ketchup based. Thick. Gooey. Snot like sauce.  Lemon chicken was ok. Not great, but not bad either. Good bits of chicken. Ok flavor. Sauce was so so. Overall the best of the 3.  Recommendations... go to Mu Shu instead. See the owner there. His name is Gary, he will give you real food. Eat it and be happy. Without the (insert pun here) afterwards."							
3JGHED38ED7996JORNYD9ITSC2RY7X	"I was excited to see a new restaurant in the neighborhood as I live nearby, and had to give it a try on it's opening weekend. It's a good environment. It's pretty open, there's a decent sized bar withTV's (so it'd be a good place to catch a game), and they played some good classic rock music that wasn't too loud....  The hostess was polite and warned us before we were seated that there may be little longer than normal wait as the kitchen was backed up, we weren't in a hurry so we were ok with that. According to her, some people got pissed and stormed out...I, for one, thought it was great that she warned us before we sat down and ordered and just figured it out on our own.  We tried a couple tapas, which were good. They are a little expensive, but I guess it's what you get in the neighborhood....But, paying an extra dollar or two per tapa is ok with me to stay a couple blocks from home.  We also tried the combo paella and thought it was excellent. It was $36, but it was more than enough for two of us.  We also had 2 pitchers of sangria. Now this is the one complaint I had....Sangria (and it's pricing) is not listed on the menu....But, being at a Spanish tapas bar, we knew they had to have it...So we ordered a pitcher. We finished our pitcher but still had some paella left, so we were going to order 2 more glasses of sangria. The waiter recommended another pitcher. We figured he recommended it because it was a value to get a pitcher instead of just 2 glasses....Well, when the bill came we found out our 2 pitchers of sangria were $30 each! That's outrageous! It was good, but each pitcher only yielded about 4 glasses. Our bill was $120 for two of us. $60 for food, $60 for sangria!  I'll be back for sure, but might stick to just 1 pitcher of sangria next time!  And the couple reviews on here berating the place....Keep in mind, this is the first couple nights it's been open. There is always a little bit of a break-in period. And complaining because they didn't ""offer you a gift card"" on the way out since you didn't like your meal? That's ridiculous, go put your hand out somewhere else. Glad I don't have to worry about possibly sitting next to you at the bar!"							
3N5YJ55YXGJXG9D8RO1M2TXB9QTNAN	"I was here on the 4th of July because it was the only place open I could find at 11pm. Everything started off great. the hostess was nice and friendly. She gave us our menus and told us our server would be with us shortly.  It took him 10 minutes to finally show up. It wasn't busy at all. Don't know why it took him that long. He too our order for drinks and came  back 5 minutes later.  At this point, I'm starting to get annoyed.    We finally ordered and he took our order and seemed confused. We had to tell him 3 times exactly what we wanted.  20 minutes later, our hostess was bringing our food, not the server. WTF? She apologized for the delay. I looked across the room and saw our server handing drinks to another table. Really? We were waiting a long time.  We were all pissed at this time and to make matters worse, he got one of the orders wrong. Nothing remotely to what we wanted. We didn't say anything because we wanted to eat and get the hell out.    I finished my drink and waited for the server to come by and offer a refill. I waited and waited and waited. He walked by our table at least 4 x and not once, bothered to check on how we were.  After 15 minutes, I finally got up and spoke to the manager. I explained to him what was happening and he asked me to described the server. I gave a brief description  and he stopped me by saying ""Oh, that's Ryan"" with a bit of bite in his tone. I guess Ryan  has had complaints before. The hostess brought our drinks and apologized again.    When it came time for the check, he actually brought it to our table, the nerve of that guy. He came back to pick up the check and to clear the table. The server dropped silverware on me as he was taking a plate off the table. Good thing I ate everything or else food would have landed on me. That was the last straw.     I signed the slip and where it says TIP, I wrote NONE. DOESNT DESERVE ONE. I have always left a tip behind and am always generous with 18-20%, but not this time. The food was good, but the service was horrible. Only good thing was the hostess. I should have tipped her since she was doing his job."							
3AC6MFV69KY67LZ50IM8E2ROWZRHZ9	I was hoping this place would be great! Ordered the bacon wrapped dates which I probably wouldn't order again. The chicken chorizo paella was terrible. We took one bite & sent it back. Probably the worst I've ever had. Sent it back & never had a manager come to the table. Our server was nice & it was obvious that she had just come back from a smoke break. I don't have any intentions on going back.							
3X2LT8FDHWY9KFT7MR8V2L47CEXW8J	"I was impressed with this Italian restaurant located in Fashion Show Mall. I was not aware this was a chain restaurant until my wife told me. I wish they had one in San Diego, but the closest one to us is in Orange County at the South Coast Plaza. I ordered the four cheese ravioli which came with two sauces, basil pesto and marinara, evenly distributed over the dish. The amount of ravioli was bountiful. I was barely able to finish it and when I did I was really full. My wife had the spaghetti with meatballs which she had no problem finishing.  We tried to eat here again before we left but it was too busy. I think there was an hour wait. And this was on a Sunday night. This is a good sign the restaurant is doing something right since there are plenty of choices at the mall.  The service was a bit slow but the waiter kept us informed on when our meals would be ready. No big deal, we were not in a rush. Even though I am not a big fan of chain restaurants, this one is worth a try."							
3UY4PIS8QR11ML08V58TRS485WNN1Z	"I was in-between 4 and 5 stars on this one, but I had such a good time, I bumped it up.   The wait was a bit long, but decent considering that it was a Friday evening in Vegas with no reservation. This place is not expensive, especially for what you are getting.  Also, it has a much nicer feel than any other ""family"" Italian eateries without being stuffy.  Once seated, we received pretty good service with a smile.  I wasn't able to try the bread that was complimentary, but everyone at my table seemed to enjoy it.  The apps (calamari and zucchini) were delish.  At some point in the evening, we were serenaded by two men playing instruments.  I have fond memories of Steve singing along, lol.  Everyone also seemed to enjoy their pasta dishes.  This place serves everything family style, so if you don't want to share, be prepared to take a doggy bag.  I ordered the pesto linguine with chicken and it was DELICIOUS.  Warning:  you should REALLY love pesto to order this dish.  We were WAY too full to have any dessert, but the options sounded promising.  Tip:  They have skinny cocktails if that's your thing.  I had the skinny sangria and it was yummy.  Too bad it didn't matter with all of the food that I inhaled!"							
3H781YYV6TYY1ZZ44PPK7BTUJNDTEP	"I was instantly alarmed when we were seated and I saw food stuck on the empty wine glass in front of me. I could hardly place a drink order with the server because I was so fixated on this overlooked problem. Only compounding the unease, we were placed on the edge of the aisle, the front legs of my chair were on a carpeted area and the back in the aisle ... so I always felt like I was about to fall off my chair. (And this was before the wine!)   Our server was curt and lacked warmth. I think this may have been the result of me being sucked into the tractor beam of the dirty wine glass when I was ordering. We had to ask twice for butter (over EVOO). However, we were truly glad this restaurant was open so late! (Most every sit-down establishment was was closed except Buca and Maggiano's).   While it is chain food and has that ""chain"" quality (frozen), it is still filling and occasionally tasty. If you are a vegetarian, be careful! Many of the appetizers (like the stuffed mushrooms) and entrees use chicken-stock for flavor (which is not posted on the menu). We discovered this ""the hard way."" Ask your server for guidance.  Maggiano's receives high-marks from us for being open late in this city that seems to close-down everything but the casinos after 10:30. Nonetheless, the walk to the deserted Fashion Mall (at this hour) is truly harrowing (we saw NO security in this area whatsoever) so go in a large, alert group. Seriously."							
3PN6H8C9R46OUXMV2UNJ6OLHVMRADS	"I was introduced to this restaurant when I use to work in the OC.  I love this chain compared to Olive Garden.  Every time I have been to a Maggiano's whether it is OC or here, I always seem to wait a little.  Just my luck probably.  We like the atmosphere and the food is good.  Below are the usual that we order:  Appetizers: Bruschetta, Stuffed Mushrooms Pastas: Spaghetti Meatball, Fettuccine Alfredo, Lasagna Desserts: Creme Brulee, Tiramisu  Pastas are very well prepared as well, but our favorites that keep us coming back are the appetizers and desserts.  This is definitely one of my favorite restaurants to go to.  The only thing that was a turn off for us for this location was that the outdoor dining we had to put up with someone that was smoking at a nearby table.  We have kids so this was rather inconvenient."							
3S8APUMBJXZQBR5JZEI5PZ88PHTBF0	"I was looking forward to having a new neighborhood spot that served something off the beaten path but I left feeling frustrated. We went for a nightcap and I had a pretty decent glass of Tempranillo. We ordered a bottle of Pellegrino and when we got the bill we were shocked that they charged $10 for a 24oz Pellegrino (medium sized bottle). This is absurd and when we asked the bartender, she agreed that the pricing for bottled water there is off the wall. It may sound trivial but I feel that I was completely ripped off. This pricing is not fair in the least bit and needs to be re-evaluated.   I have not eaten there yet so I can't speak of the food quality but I honestly might not make it back in because of the ridiculous pricing issue."							
3HEA4ZVWVD2WKEVLSSEJ01H3QRU55B	"I was pleasantly surprised by a trip to Maggiano's a little over a month ago during a visit to Las Vegas.  I normally avoid chains, but this one is worth visiting again.  The appetizers were all very good (we went during happy hour).  The main courses were huge and moderately priced.  The service was very fast without bring rushed and our waitress was friendly.  The location is convenient on the front of the Fashion Show Mall.  Easy access from The Wynn, which is where I was staying.  Plenty of on-site parking as the mall has every parking option under the sun."							
3HRWUH63QUI0A31RWSA5UIHPHCSN5H	"I was really disappointed with the service here. I went for a quick lunch on the Tuesday before Christmas and ordered  a draft beer and a burger. It took forever for the beer to come, even after I managed to intercept the server to ask about it. When it finally showed up it was flat, and I went through the process again to get a bottle instead, thinking they couldn't screw that up. Meanwhile, I could see the bartender practicing his bottle-flipping moves -and he wasn't very good at that either. The place was nearly empty but the server was usually nowhere to be seen. When the burger finally came, it was fine I guess, but I was too pissed off to enjoy it. I had to flag down caught the manager to get my check. Then I had to get her again to charge the meal to my room - they needed to use a different check for that, and no one asked me how I wanted to pay. The place was not very well run and seemed indifferent to the customers. I won't go back."							
3KTZHH2ONIVDF3ZTIP28TN2GECKM8J	i was recently at this restraunt for a birthday gathering superbowl sunday!  and oh my goodness was it delish!  the waiter nick was so helpful (and nice to look at btw)  he really tended to us as we had a lot of people!  i will be goin here again!							
388FBO7JZR9YCRBB7UF25FFICHWYN8	"I was shocked to see the low ratings about First Watch.  We have been here dozens of times and the food and service have always been top notch.  It is consistently great.  I will continue to support this great breakfast and lunch spot.  Special recognition to the servers-everyone is so friendly, positive and laid back."							
3PUOXASB57JDSFHM26YG1LT0DMJ9ZB	"I was spending time with my parents and my brother in las vegas over winter break and we ate at Maggiano's Little Italy in Los Angeles. The food was fantastic in LA and we were guests of a party. We were at the Fashion Show mall and I spotted Maggiano's on the side and suggested that we go here to eat for dinner before watching a water show at Wynn/Encore. We reserved a table via yelp and only had to wait 5-10 minutes for our table (which had a stunning view of Wynn and Encore and the Las Vegas strip)! The food was delicious (I believe we ordered chicken, two pastas, two desserts, and something else) and the atmosphere was heavenly. The service was top notch and it was a perfect way to end a day in Vegas."							
3FBEFUUYRKLP9O7GS7F50IBPE05A61	"I was there for my birthday, and a couple of us had our birthdays on the same day or weekend, so we thought it'd be cool have our b-day dinner there.   The food was good. I forgot what I had (No, I wasn't drunk...wait...was I?) but I know it was good and they give good, hearty portions.   The negatives were how crammed-up the dining area is. I mean, if you're claustrophobic, then this ain't the place for you. You can damn near eat off the next table if you're slick enough.   The other issue I had was the 2 serenading musicians. Now, they probably didn't mean any harm but after coming to our table, one of them noticed we were all Black and said ""I don't know any rap but I take requests"" - Wow. Did he REALLY just go there? I had to put him in check and told him to keep it movin' before I show him what Gangsta Rap LOOKS like when a violin becomes a weapon. Needless to say...he quickly got out of there.   Then they misplaced the birthday cake, but later found it...then lost the top that goes over it...then later found it. Yeah, it was one of those nights.   But the food was good. Maybe a tad bit overrated for the price though, especially in a food-ladened city like Vegas."							
33NKDW9FFXYQLIOAD8KM6QEXB7OCXY	"I was told this is some of the best Chinese food in Phoenix. It doesn't really compare to what you can find in LA, but for Phoenix, it's a definitely thumbs up. My favorite dish here was probably the least Chinese dish of all - chicken salad. I'd get that again for sure - in Phoenix or LA!"							
32204AGAABS6G440AQYJTVBIL9YHGL	"I was very surprised how good the food is here. I had a chicken burrito and for the price and quality I really enjoyed it.  The chips and salsa are amazing two different salsas. Happy hour is amazing the only downfall is the atmosphere they had a bootleg UFC fight on every tv. Like the fights you see on a weird channel, Just kinda weird for a Mexican joint. I hope this place stays around I didn't see too many people in here."							
3INZSNUD806APECQAO9JATAXP4A9DD	I was waiting for my room to be ready and noticed Happy Hour was just starting.  Haven't been in a TGI's in about 15 years.  Plenty of seating at the bar that early and I ordered a Bass and the potato skins app.  The potato skins would have been enough for 3-4 people and I pushed down all but one.  They were OK and an excellent value at $6.  Service was all right.							
3RTFSSG7T8M4ZMDQGGHZ7QQDWEXLWV	"I was with a group of ten and after finally deciding on Italian food for dinner, we headed to Maggiano's.  It was a Monday night at 8pm and it was pretty crowded.  We were told that we HAD to order off the family style menu even though the menu clearly states that they ""ASK parties of 10 or more to order Family Style."" There was no mention anywhere that this was required.  After asking if it was possible to order individual entres, the hostess looked at us like we were stupid and asked ""why?""  I simply stated we all have different tastes and one person in our party had food allergies.  Then what looked like the manager came over and told us that the kitchen could not accommodate a group of ten individual entres and that the only way we could do that is if we split into two groups of five HOWEVER this would make the wait even LONGER.  We were confused because the kitchen would still be making ten orders but whatever.  We were annoyed with them already and decided to leave and check out El Segundo Sol, the Mexican restaurant right below Maggiano's.  Read my review of El Segundo Sol, they definitely took care of us!"							
35JDMRECC4PUWUDYKPQD8SE5TT6EG2	"I watched this place sit idle during the Great Recession and then was so pleased to see something going in there when the economy improved.  Toros Spanish Kitchen & Gaming is a good addition to the small shopping center.  We stopped last night and had dinner.  I had looked over the menu online but I wanted to look at theirs in house as there were other items than the tapas I'd seen online.  Our server brought iced tea.  We had to wait a bit to catch the server's eye to get some Sweet 'n Low but eventually we got it.  The complimentary toasted slices of bread was nice.  I used it more for a pusher than anything else.    I ordered three items to start_an order of sauted mushrooms in garlic and sherry wine, gnocchi with shrimp in a garlic cream sauce (I thought I'd be able to sneak the shrimp past my wife), and last, an order of croquetas with ham, cream cheese, and bchamel.    The winner of the trio was the gnocchi with shrimp.  When my wife got to the one shrimp I hadn't been able to screen out with the spoon, that was all for her.  Score for me--I finished the dish.  The gnocchi were soft and the shrimp, although small, were good.  It was a nice combination.  Next, the garlic mushrooms were really good.  Sauted nicely in garlic and sherry, the mushrooms were very good.  The disappointing dish for me was the croquetas.  They were very light and had hardly and body to them yet it was difficult to pick them up.  They broke in half.  There was not a bchamel sauce but a marinara like sauce.  We decided not to order more.  The three dishes were filling--well almost.  We ordered the chocolate lava cake.  It takes 15 minutes to make (the menu states this clearly so if you're in a hurry, order early).  The lava cake was rich chocolate cake with chocolate sauce and a scoop of vanilla ice cream.  A nice way to end a good dinner.  Service was spotty.  Our server seemed to be nowhere in sight for much of the time while the server who had the tables on each side of us seemed to be at those tables all the time and the place was not that crowded.  During dinner, the owner came around to ask how things were and the personal touch is always appreciated.  It's also very good business.  The spotty service kept me from giving Toros four stars.  I thought the pricing was very fair.  If you subtract the desert we had from the bill, the total would equal about what I paid for 1 person at another tapas place and I left hungry.  Two of us ate for the same coast and we left without feeling hunger.  We need to come back and try some of the other dishes.  I also need to come back with some friends and without my wife.  There are items I'd like to try from the menu that she won't eat!  Her loss.  Time for a UYE?"							
35U0MRQMUJNZQIGI3YSVD5BTKAZVOB	"I went from saying ""Thank god it's Friday"" to saying ""this is the worst diarrhea I've ever had"" on Saturday."							
3JYPJ2TAYIOSFL6TIJ06KJDX6L7FPO	I went here after seeing all the good reviews. It lives up to expetations. Kung pao chicken and mongolian beef were delicious. The staff was out quick and served quick. I'll certainly be back.							
3ZRKL6Z1E8JV6DIGLKAIX9IKUKFGS5	"I went here for a wedding dinner party. So considering that they were serving a party of about 25 they did an awesome job. We had so much food I must have gained 5 lbs leaving there. We had a variety of different dishes from spinach-artichoke dip, bruschetta, lasagna, spaghetti, fetticuni alfredo - I can't even remember the rest. But it was very good - ALL OF IT! The servers served all of us quickly, the food was hot and delicious and the ambiance was very romantic!"							
33P2GD6NRN8BIQ0J0HJYRN3BSQFKHR	"I went here for lunch and will not return. With so many options in Vegas for food, the details count. I asked for Maggianos Salad and I received it although it tasted like it was premade 5 hours prior with soggy lettuce.  The flatbread was good and the service was bad hence the 3 stars. A restaurant such as this should not be sending out pre-made salads with soggy lettuce."							
3P7QK0GJ3T12SVWNHXJ1RYLM7G9Z29	"I went here for my 21st birthday dinner. Thankfully it was in walking distance from my hotel. The food was amazing, everyone in my party (party of 11) loved what they got and devoured it. I ordered the Linguine de Mare and it was amazing. I also heard great things about the spaghetti, my friend said it reminded her of the way her grandma would make it. The service was good, and I enjoyed being serenaded for my birthday by the cutest old man playing the guitar. Overall very pleased with my experience."							
3H1C3QRA01ZHFIXTI3UUI1TQV1EECS	I went here with my dad and wife.  The food was okay; a bit pricy to get everyone full.  The only bad thing was the prawns; they were not deveined.							
371QPA24C24ZHY5SS1U50RA0UEA1TF	"I went in looking for a good margarita and some food. I asked if they made they margarita  mix fresh with real limes or used a sweet and sour mix. They use a mix and add to it. So I did not order a margarita., I looked at the menu and decided it was too expensive for me to eat  there. $10.00 for a cheese  enchilada and sides, first I really didn't t want the sides , there was no ala carte menu. So I opted not to eat there. The place was nice and clean. The customers are rude."							
307FVKVSYRVTBZ542GA6TTPLH1T47J	I went their for my husbands birthday the food was really good ... Omg the four cheese ravioli are the best if you're planning to go you have to try them :)							
3XD2A6FGFNAGR3V87E485SWXQ7K9S7	"I went to this restaurant last weekend and had a great experience.  Everything we ordered was great and the service was excellent. It had the atmosphere of a very nice restaurant, and the prices were reasonable. I'll definitely be back!"							
3JVP4ZJHDP891V4Z26R18FPHE5NI0B	"I went to this TGIF yesterday, and i order the babyback ribs. I feel as though they have left it out for a while or it was overcook, and it was also really dry. and maybe they just put bbq sauce on the ribs, but i do enjoy their buffalo wings. it was spicy just the way i like it."							
3WKGUBL7SZ2SQKU66ABGCY7MCLXL48	"I won't let you turn around And tell me now I'm much too proud All you do is fill me up with doubt This time, baby, I'll be bulletproof...at MAGGIANO'S! - La Roux (bulletproof)  Thank God this place was where i thought it was!! I remember seeing the wynn when i came here a long time ago from the windows since it is on the 2nd floor of its structure but you are never sure, especially since i was running on 5 redbulls for the day and had like 4 hours of sleep from the night before. It was so cold and we were hungry and i was leading us to this place that i thought was here and it was...yay!!! The portions here are awesome by the way..too bad its hard to keep leftovers when you are around in vegas - which is what happened to me lol. Anyways, ordered the lobster pasta and there was a good amount of lobster chunks in it. The side salad had a good portion to it too so i would recommend that if you want the veggies. The ciabatta bread in the beginning was tasty and wanted more. Wish i saved room for dessert, not possible here! Oof maybe next time outside of vegas.  Food: 4 stars --- Service: 4 stars --- Atmosphere: 4.5 stars --- Price(value): 4 stars"							
3VGZ74AYTGWFZWTKOYKII4E28HSCG6	"I work near by (2 minute walking distance) and come here often. If you are a first timer, try the original gyro with fries (or salad). You will not be dissappointed. Have also tried their chicken pita, specifically the chicken hani pita and it was excellent. Love the salad they give on the side with every Pita dish.  Place is clean. Staff is very friendly. Two Large screen TVs. Cannot go wrong for the price. Highly recommended."							
32W3UF2EZO1ZNG00TXIH9FHZICKC4K	"i would give it 5 stars.... any other time i would give this place 5 stars - because this place )and the bay area, CA one is amazing and have never had a negative moment.... BUT when i went 4/16/2012 - this evening - the inside host was absolutely pure rudeness!! first we went in with a reservation (why one makes reservations here - you still got to wait) we were early so that worked out because we got in just about right after our reservation time... when we walked in we were welcomed by 2 host, the girl on the right when you walk in took our name, and we asked her if we could sit outside, she rudely walkie her outside host and told us no seats available, we took our page and as we did I assured with her we would be seated outside, she said yes just wait until its our actual reservation.... our buzzer page and we came inside to thesame host, and she told us to step to the side and wait to be seated, I said ""well be seated outside, right?"" host, ""no, you never said anything about wanting to be outside, if you wanted to sit outside all you had to do was ask the outside host and be seated out there"", here I bit my tongue from yelling or getting loud and i informed he that she never said any of that and that I had mentioned more than twice that we wanted to sit outside and recalled for her how she even called out to the outside host, the host stated ""oh that wasn't me, you must have talked to someone else"" so lets just say this went on for a few minutes, i was VERY UPSET!! we had to walk ourselves outside and talk to the outside host ourselves to be seated.... our waiter Miguel - took our mind off it, made us laugh and was so good spirited.... he also can carry a couple arm full of dishes.... food is good!!"							
3D0LPO3EABFGUCBN89FFK4FN2R2OYE	"I would give this place 5 stars..but our waiter..EVERY time he poured me water, he spilled it. Only mine. -__-   First time was a big ass spill..next one went on my bread..third one went on my meal. Come on maaayynn.   BUT THE FOOD WAS BOMB DIGGITY!  Went to Maggiano's for me, and 2 other friend's birthday dinner with everyone! They have a nice little family meal which is a ridiculous amount of food. But it's all you can eat. Doesn't really explain much,  but if you have a big group..I would suggest that you get that. (Although we didn't order it..lol)   Service was pretty good. We got some toasty warm bread (yum) and their butter is so  yums!  I ended up ordering the chicken & spinach manicotti. SOOO CREAMY..SO DELIIICIOUS! Comes in 3 decent sized pieces, and I just wanted to savor every bite.   It's really quiet in there..none of the other customers talk, so for the most part, my friends and I were the entertainment of the night.   We were seated in the back right corner, so we are able to see the other hotels and what not. All of a sudden, we see 4 cop cars chasing this white car, and it stopped right in front of our view. All of us got up and it was so intense!!!  The police ripped the driver out of the car and shoved him to the ground. Ohmygah. That was good stuff.   Also, I can't fail to mention..we all got to go boxes and bags..and we took some pictures outside. This was towards the hotels, so away from Maggiano's. My friend left her bag near a trashcan and left her Coach wristlet inside. We were all facing away..when we were done with the picture, she asked where her bag was. We had no idea.. I said to not worry, cause it's just her food..but none of us knew her credit card, iD, and other important things were in it.   ANYONE could've taken it! LUCKILY. One of our friends saw 2 homeless men downstairs carrying a Maggiano's bag, and he looked inside the bag and pulled out the food and Coach wristlet!   Friend's bf sprinted down the stairs and charged for the guy and said, ""GIMME THAT BAG!"" & the homeless guy was pissed, but gave it back. If it wasn't for our one friend who saw him, we would've never found it.   Just wanted to share the crazy experiences from Maggiano's :]   But I would definitely suggest this place! It's really good. Tried all of my friend's food..and perfecto!"							
3WPCIUYH1AOT9TL48UE01TB9JBCTDW	"I would have given it 5 stars but our first server was HORRIBLE!! I wish I could remember his name. Thankfully he ended up going home after our appetizers, and we got a new server! The food was delicious and very filling! We ordered the family style option, and it was way too much food for 4 people! We had yummy leftovers though!"							
3Q2T3FD0ONORE6TN687C26U5YQS3M8	"I would say this is the best Chinese food I've had so far in Phoenix area. Have eaten twice, though both times take out, when having dinner with friends who live close to the restaurant.   The honey walnut prawns are really tasty, and my other favorite was their eggplant. So delicious!  I wish they were not so far from where we live or I'd go back more often."							
302OLP89DZNEP5GH2YS8MI3ZAMFACS	"I'm a huge fan and love everything about Maggiano's. Decided to take the family as part of our Vegas Birthday weekend getaway. It was my sons 21st and wanted to make it special. Probably a little much for my kids (Young Adults). They are of the Vegas Buffet Breed. But they agreed to check it out.  Had a reservation and asked for the Best table in the house overlooking the Vegas Strip. Dinner was in typical Maggiano style. Hot, Full of Flavor, Huge in serving size just perfect. I would say the only down side was service. Granted the place was full and the it was a Vegas Friday night. Had to ask for water, drinks, rolls, the basics.  The server was not on his game at all. Shame normaly the staff goes above and beyond. Still we had a great dinner and I will be going back to my own local Maggiano's (Woodland Hills) hopefully soon."							
3P7RGTLO6ETW83S5UB96A1G7FVPKAG	"I'm all in for this place. I just wish i felt better to better enjoy the food!!  After a wicked Friday night, i just wasn't feeling it. Def needed some food and well the GF and were set on finding something gluten friendly. Enter Maggiano's and their gluten free pasta. Not to mention you can actually talk to the chef if you have some question. A+  I ordered up the Angle hair pasta with Italian Sausage and some kind of chunky diced tomato sauce.. AWESOME it was that was. The gf chopped it up with the chef for a minute and he came back with a baked zitti *Corn Pasta* type thing with chicken and tons of cheese. I stole a bite or two and yup YUMMO!  The place looks super upscale and ultra expensive but really for where you're at and it being on the strip, it a must go."							
3HXCEECSQM9STGPUAIQW02MRMV4YZP	"I'm giving it a 3 because I have had some very good meals there. But today I had their Shrimp Risoto Special and it was pretty terrible. Not inedible. But not up to their normal quality.   I know Risoto can be a tough dish, but if you can't make it well maybe you should just stay away from it."							
3N2YPY1GI6EDER3T9KPZ8THFG8UEVR	"I'm here pretty regularly for a breakfast meeting, so I've grown pretty well acquainted with the joint.  If I were rating it on service alone, it'd be a solid 5 stars. The waitstaff are always attentive and friendly, have answered questions I didn't even ask (thank you, psychic bathroom directions buddy!) , and know the menu well. They don't even bat an eye at special requests. No matter what size group we end up having, the servers and the kitchen both cope well, too, which is always rad.  The food, alas, isn't as standout awesome as the service. It's not bad by any means. It's edible and tastes good and comes out at the appropriate temperature. The menu's got a great variety. It's just not anything to write home about. If you asked me ""Where can I get a reliably decent breakfast,"" First Watch would be at the top of the heap. If you want a mind-blowingly amazing breakfast, not so much."							
3A520CCNWNGTM30VYPY3C632VYTAEM	"I'm not a fan of chain restaurants period!...but here is the skinny on Maggiano's, I had the opportunity to eat here with a small group and a large group and you would think the experience would be better with a smaller group....think again, the menu is different and you definitely know you are eating at a chain restaurant. Food was heavy loaded with sauces and it's obvious there are lots of can openers in the kitchen.   Now believe it or not when you have 15-20 people they serve a family style dinner and the food is a higher quality and the good pasta's, the sausage &pepper appetizer is great! But the most impressive is the deserts...what a presentation! and delicious.  There house Chianti is great for the price, I highly recommend it.   The service is also much better with a larger group....go figure."							
341H3G5YF0UVWLT92AFN8AS7AIPZ0P	"I'm not big on chain restaurants but Maggiano's is my fav italian spot!  I've never had a bad experience at the Woodland Hills location in CA and LV did not disappoint. The food is always great and so is the service.  I've tried a lot of the appies and my favs are the calamari, stuffed mushrooms and the shrimp oreganata! AWESOME!  I love the four cheese ravioli with the pesto alfredo.  As Rachel says...YUM-O!  The maggiano's chopped salad is also great.    This place all in all is great for groups or even a nice dinner with BF.  Keep it up Maggiano's!"							
3RSBJ6YZEC6AULUS3JNRVJ87WGBFO7	"I'm not claiming that Toros has the best tapas in town, but they are good enough for me to come back.  I've been here just twice and I'm a fan.   Here's what you get at Toros... -Smoke Free -TV Screens (a lot of them and perfect for the game) -Great Service -Spacious Joint -Inexpensive mini dishes (i.e. tapas) -Happy Hour Specials (look for the red star on the menu) -New Establishment -Not too busy  Tapas (My Rankings): -Oxtail:  My goodness, this is good..ness.  It's a bit rich, but nothing beat their fall off the bone oxtail.  Perfect with rice.   -Asparagus:  Grilled to perfection. I think I can eat two orders on my own.    -Bacon Wrapped Dates:  Pretty good.  Not sure what was better, the bacon or the dates.  Regardless, still tasty.    -Meatballs:  Not the best that I've had, but a good addition if you're looking to add some meat to your diet.  My opinion, the sauce was a little runny.   There's a lot more that I've tried and a lot more on their menu that I haven't tried.  For now, it's their oxtail and asparagus that keeps me wanting more. Thumbs up for price, value, and selection."							
3HY86PZXPYYXSFNV265A15AZR4N1EP	"I'm not sure how I feel about this place after my one visit on early Sunday evening.  It's walking distance from my house and they have an outside sitting option which is a bonus for me if I have my dog(s) with me.   It's an expansive and varied menu but pricey in my opinion for a neighborhood bar.  The server suggested the tapas menu on the back since we weren't really interested in a meal.  We ordered a pitcher of Sangria for $26.  Way to high!  It was about 6:30 when we got there so we just missed happy hour but really for a local neighborhood bar I would probably be a frequent visitor if that happy hour was all day or even if there were more drink specials available.  Like John Cutter next door you can get a free drink by signing up by text.  For tapas we chose the calamari, ceviche, and the chicken skewers.  A complimentary bread basket with dipping sauce was also provided.  I have no complaints about the food and the tapas were fairly priced.  The restaurant was larger then it appeared outside but almost empty minus a couple other tables.  The bar is large and offers gaming so that's an option if you're a fan of that.    Because of it's proximity to my house I can't say I will not find myself here again but I will make sure I arrive when happy hour is still in effect."							
34OWYT6U3WXRXPSC22AU1QQAH9HI9N	"I'm not surprised to see the wide variance in the ratings for China Chili, to be fair they tend to be incomsistent. It has been a staple for us going back 15 years to their location on Central. We have visitors from SF, Vancouver, NY, LA who are consistently amazed to find Chinese food of this quality in Phoenix. Even if they are the best of Phoenix on a good day, they are not rivals for the 5 stars in those towns though.  Here's a few tips for getting the most out of China Chile. Don't do take out. Always get a soup, hot n sour is our favorite. Chicken Salad is special. They never miss on spring rolls and pot stickers. Honey walnut prawns get my luv one Jonesing to go there. Orange chicken and orange beef have not disappointed. Noodles have. Chow fun or chow mein should be on your order. They do shell fish superbly, especially scallops. Whole fish is a mixed bag some great, some not so. The pork chops and chashu are a bit dry for my taste. Special menus on the whole have been disappointing. It's boom or bust, but if they offer seared beef tenderloin take the risk. One night I'm raving to fiends about how good it is, at the same time a guy at an adjacent table is complaining to the manager about the very same dish. That's China Chile."							
38VTL6WC4ATUM2553UJGBYFWLWX5YQ	"I'm not the biggest fan of chain places mostly because the food lacks love and atmosphere seems fake.  But if there's a chain place that does it right, it would have to be Maggiano's.  The food feels like its been prepared with care and the place is comfortable without being too commercial.  And their Las Vegas location is no exception.  The Maggiano's Salad and Chocolate Zuccotto Cake are a must try.  What was particularly interesting for this visit was the wine I had.   I usually find it difficult to smell what I'm suppose to smell in red wine: hints of strawberries, cherries, oak, vanilla, leather, sunshine, earth, wind, fire, etc, whatever.  Not this time: I smelled the floral bouquet that was suppose to be in my red.  I was so shocked that I was practically snorting instead of drinking it. The only reason I stopped was I heard our waiter ask, ""Is everything okay, sir?""  And as I looked up from my glass to answer, I saw the wife shaking her head with the ""What are you doing?"" look and the waiter slightly looming behind her with a smirk. I placed my glass down and responded, ""We're fine.  Thank you."" I should've responded with ""This wine may have gone sour.  Could you please bring me something else?""  But then he would have taken the only wine I could smell properly."							
3HA5ODM5KA8EOA8BAF94XALUHZ2VS8	"I'm only half Asian so I'm not sure if my opinion counts. tho the price is cheap and the service is lightning fast the food does not stack up.  yet the place was packed.    There was enough oil on my food for me to deep fry my thanksgiving turkey, luckily it was not peanut oil otherwise i would have ask for a to go box."							
3PGQRAZX020VS43GFQWO49POZG4YSK	"I'm really surprised about the star rating as one person said it was very good food but only gave them 3 stars cuz it was IHOP. How is that fair???   My daughter and I were seated immediately. The restaurant wasn't crowded at all so we got service very quick although it took us a little while to figure what we wanted.   This was the very best IHOP I've ever been to. The food looked just like the picture which was surprising since no restaurant's food looks like their pictures anywhere. I was so happy to see the pancakes so perfect.   There were only a few people working. One waiter, 1 Manager (I think that's what he was), and a cook. The restaurant was very clean, the server was polite and attentive and again, the food was perfect.   Hopefully, my visit was the norm because I do plan on returning for some more of those lightly browned pancakes!  I really don't know what these other star raters are talking about. Maybe the stars were aligned and the pancake gods reigned down maple flavored fairy dust on me that day because the food was terrific and the staff did their jobs.   If you want some good IHOP food, Go here and get it!"							
3RWSQDNYL92GO8HZ4G418PZT4FKFFL	"I'm so excited about this place. I live in Henderson but it is worth the drive. I love the environment, kind of rustic meets Spanish. Food is unique, as it is from different regions of Spain (menu even shows origins). I moved here from Idaho where there is a huge Basque population, it is great to bring some of that culture to this city. Also, staff was very friendly and welcoming. I was very impressed that the owner even came to my table to check on our experience. All in all I would recommend this place to anyone looking for a great place to have drinks and/or eat."							
39WICJI5AT8RDDS6LXX6A8QEDU9Z3K	"I'm surprised this place has four stars, which I think is a little high if you're judging based on taste, but value for your money, this is definitely good value.  I came here a couple nights ago with a very large group (about 14?). We showed up without notice, and they were still able to get a table for us in about half an hour or so. The table ordered off the family style menu where you can only pick two of each course, but can have as much of those courses as you want until you're ready for the next one. We ordered calamari, caesar salad, another type of salad (I think it was the Maggiano's), tomato with mozarella, chicken parmesan, lasagna, spaghetti with marinara sauce, salmon, tiramisu, and cheesecake. The salads were decent - crisp, and tangy. The mozarella that came with the tomato was not very smooth and a little too 'pizza mozarella' tasting for me. The spaghetti with marinara sauce was my personal favorite, along with some of the other people at the table. It was light, and the spaghetti was cooked to just the right tenderness. The lasagna was very salty and the meat chunky in an unpleasant, crumbly way. It wasn't chewy, cheesy, and meshing with the lasagna layers.   The cheesecake was really delicious, came with fresh strawberries and whipped cream. Mm!  The service was a little slow and sometimes unmindful of us, but it was fairly busy in the restaurant, so I can understand.  I'd come here for a decent large group setting with fairly cheap eats, but I wouldn't come here for a date or a small intimate group meal."							
3GVPRXWRPHANJ64JN5CANUZ4MJTI7B	"I'm very surprise with all the letters written here for the place because some are not reviews are letters, so i decide to go and taste the Tapas  close to my place, and for me is a beautiful restaurant i love the chandeliers, the staff was very friendly and the most important the tapas sooo good for me, the stuffed dates, the piquillo peppers, and the Paella delicious like the one i ate on my trip to Spain, and other thing, i like to see families on the tables and friends enjoying at the bar, for a new place it's a great start i'm definitely will come back  this weekend."							
3ZLW647WALB172PUWQOSNXG7SLB23G	"i'v only been here a couple times, but food is always consistent and amazing here. if you have the honor of having Jacob as your server you're going to have an awesome experience. he was the best server ever. very knowledgeable and personable. will definitely be coming back because of him!"							
3VCK0Q0PO5U1FWFQZM4TDNLY04HN0W	"I've been here a few times. Mostly its been good. But, There is only one good thing I can say about my experience with Maggiano's this last time. The Waitress was great. She was on the ball all night.  But, The meal was horrible. I could not believe how bad it was. It wasn't just one thing. It was everything. From the bread to the Wine. Yes, even the Wine was bad. I couldn't finish the meal. And no. I did not take a to go box.  They must have a new Juan or Hector cooking the food in the kitchen.  It certainly didn't taste like an Italian was cooking.  Terrible meal"							
3IKDQS3DQEGTVNZFEMKL3GRINUKCIY	"I've been sick for the last week and was soooo sick of liquids and soups that I wanted something hearty. I always somehow or another crave pasta; ALWAYS! So decided to have lunch here and get some Nordstrom shopping done.  Other than pasta, I had been craving fish. Luckily, the waitress sealed the deal on my dish when she said I could substitute my potatoes with pasta. So, I got the grilled salmon with lemon and thyme, sauteed spinach (with pasta and garlic and olive oil).  It was sooooo good. Exactly what I had been craving. Fresh and light tasting fish with my pasta fix!  Friend had their ""famous Rigatoni D"" which is pretty delicious. Rigatoni and penne pasta have to be my favorite kinds of pasta. Prolly because I hate having to ""slurp"" up the long stringy pastas. And mushrooms and onions added to the ringatoni always make for deliciousness and a happy Laurie =)  With it being cold lately, it was nice to end the lunch with some tea. I think I had some apricot or peach tea and friends had the peppermint tea. Great that they had big tea collection.  The service was prolly the best I've ever had there. Had to tip the waitress well just based on her refilling my waters like crazy that day. Kept having to tell her that I was really thristy and sorry for always coming back for refills."							
3HUR21WDDU53OLPF902B3H6GEV6YXS	"I've been to Caldero's probably half a dozen times now, and I always walk away glad that I went in.    The staff is always friendly and welcoming, particularly the male bartender/manager/owner (I'm not sure which one he is) who always remembers me and my boyfriend when we come in.   The chips and salsa that they put on your table after you are seated also comes with a queso sauce that is to die for, and I really wish they would put it on the menu.    The prices are fantastic for a sit-down restaurant, and the portions are more than adequate, and border on generous.   You can order items a la carte, and while most restaurants charge through the nose to do so, Caldero's doesn't.  You can get a Carnitas burrito for $4.50, or a Carne Asada burrito for $5, both of which are literally only pennies more than you would pay at Filliberto's and the quality is much better.  They have a bunch of a la carte items, and all are more than reasonably priced.   My favorite entree so far is the Chicken Empanadas plate.  It comes with two empanadas stuffed to the gills with white meat chicken, and whatever sides you choose.   You get a choice of what your sides are, instead of just having rice & beans dumped on your plate.  I always request the lemon-cilantro rice and the charro beans, but there are many other options.    I've had their carnitas, and their carne asada, and both are juicy, flavorful, and have just the right amount of spice.   Their fried ice cream is to die for, so if you can, save room for dessert, or do what we did: just went in one night for dessert alone.   The only thing I could think that people might need to know is that overall, the food here is a bit spicier than most restaurants like Garcia's or Macayo's might make,  The food heer just has a little more kick to it than you might be used to from other places.  I'm not a big ""hot"" food fan, but it still doesn't bother me.  You just may notice that your mouth is tingling a bit when you leave.   All in all, I can't recommend this place more highly.  Great food, even better prices, a friendly staff...this place has everything, and it's my go-to spot now for mexican food, and I'm doubly lucky that it's close because I won't eat mexican frood from anywhere else now.   I notice some people in other reviews saying it's expensive, but  unless you're ordering the rib-eyes, or the seafood plates, I don't see how anyone could consider this place pricey.  And, if you're going to order a rib-eye...what do you expect???  I go to steakhouses a lot, as well, and Caldero's steak prices were average.    I came here one evening with the BF and a friend of ours.  My BF got the nachos (which is just a mountain of food in itself), I got the Chicken Empanadas, our friend got a carne asada burrito, there were 2 sodas and a beer, and including tip, we spent $35.     Expensive? Not at all."							
3VEI3XUCZRDPIBB29E0018RG99JRPW	"I've been to Maggiano's a number of times, and I have not been disappointed yet.  The calamari is delicious, as are most of the pastas on the menu.  My biggest complaint is the price.  Even though the food is good, I really don't feel that it justifies the high price tag.  There are a number of basic pastas that you can get for less than $15, but these are bare bones dishes.  While still good, you're going to have to spend $20-$30 per dish if you really want to experience what they really have to offer that makes them great.  The atmosphere at Maggiano's differs between restaurants.  The Maggiano's in Denver has a much more classy, and quiet environment with great ambiance.  The Vegas location is much more noisy, usually overcrowded and the service much more casual.  Here's a few tips; make a reservation online, and in the comment box request a booth."							
3YGE63DIN8DR2QO4RNVG96YPTGLW0W	"I've been to Maggiano's before and didn't think that much of it.  However, Vegas Maggiano's may be your ""What should we eat"" dinner place.  I thought it was so worth it paying like $15 for pasta rather than paying the same amount for pho.  Plus, it feels like you can just sit down and chill.  The food is typical Italian chain so you can't go wrong."							
3S1L4CQSFXLLSH0RT0I9UOO27Z8FA9	"I've been to Maggiano's quite a few times over the years, and each time, my experience was just a little...meh. I came here with a couple of girlfriends at around 3 in the afternoon. The restaurant has a great view! After getting seated, I noticed that the tables were extremely close together. Good thing it wasn't packed that day. Our server was very nice, although I felt like she was a bit flustered throughout our meal. She remained calm and friendly though. I chose the Rustic Chicken and Shrimp, minus the shrimp. It had a little kick to it and came with red cream sauce, which I was unsure about, but it turned out pretty good. For dessert, we chose to do the sampler. Everything in it was delicious!! Except the creme brle. Extremely bland and tasteless, I didn't like it at all. The last thing I wanted to mention was that out water glasses were empty about halfway through the meal and no one refilled it. Our server only had two tables in her section so I didn't know what the deal was. Another server finally noticed during dessert and refilled it for us.   So overall, good food and average service. Just a little meh for me."							
3TRB893CSJQ9NFYOXHC72IMO7627G9	"I've been to Maggiano's several times in CA, but this was my first time in LV.  The food was good as always. The fettucini alfredo was the best I've ever had. My sister's chicken parmigiana was pretty tasty too. Again, definitely should share your plates!  What I loved most about this location was that it's right on the strip, and if you get a table by the window, you get a spectacular view of the Wynn across the street and all the bright lights of the strip. Perfect location for a romantic dinner."							
31ANT7FQN8I807FGTUFSPYKTV0KH53	"I've driven by this restaurant for decades and always wanted to check it out..So took 2 of my friends there last Friday night and was not disappointed by my meal. The decor is very dated and it looks like any generic family run Chinese/Asian restaurant. The staff was attentive and friendly. Usually I don't order appetizers or soup before my meal but we ordered a large bowl of the egg drop soup which was very good. I ordered Singapore Rice Noodles and was very happy with the entree. All in all it was a good experience, my friends who went with me eat there at least once a week.  The best part is the food is relatively inexpensive, our meal was $32 for the 3 of us, you can't go wrong with that."							
356ZPKYPUHXYFCNON9SU94KDCWXYP4	I've eaten there many times.  Nice people.  Good food.  They give you your own pitcher of water & carafe of coffee [very nice touches]!  Reasonable prices.							
3ZZAYRN1I67KDQCTY3SGCNN8NPJTOT	"I've had some pretty bad service in this town but this was terrible! First I waited ten minutes for a table that was already open when I put my name down. Then the hostess seats us and walks away. I grabbed my own menu, got my own balsamic because my server was no where to be found. Ordered a second glass of wine and never received it.I can't rememeber the servers name but sweetie if someone orders a $14.00 glass of wine at lunch rememeber to bring the other one. Guess your tips were just that good today that you didn't need that money. This happened a few weeks agao but I was at the fashion show mall today and opted to eat at the food court instaed of having another $80.00 lunch at your restaurant. That's right, id rather eat sbarro than deal with awful service. The food however was amazing! Kudos to your chef, maybe you should bring him to the FOH!"							
3PEG1BH7AE71RDXX0P925C0DXDAKBB	"I've heard about Maggiano's for awhile and finally got the chance to eat at one of their restaurants when I was in Vegas for business.  Since there were 7 of us, we decided to order family style...  $31 a head and we choose two appetizers, two salads, two pastas, two entrees, and two desserts, all you can eat!  We ordered the calamari and mussels, chopped and Italian salad, spaghetti and meatballs and linguine with clams (white sauce) the chicken marsala and tilapia, and the tiramisu and s'mores special dessert.  Calamari was great, but I was a little disappointed in the mussels.  Too many white beans in the mix for me.  The salads were good.  Linguine was good and the meatballs on the spaghetti were HUGE! The tilapia wasn't too fishy and was nice and moist and we LOVED the chicken marsala.  Both desserts were great as well.  Big points for our waiter, Noel, as well.  He was very helpful, professional, and attentive through our stay.  He encouraged us to eat more and even gave us many containers to take home our leftovers in.  The spaghetti and chicken marsala were still great the next day, as well as the desserts!"							
3H6W48L9F45UQ7SO88A6O7ZX1OXPWW	I've never eaten a a TGIFridays before so when we got a two for one coupon in the mail I decided to give the place a try. I ordered the Stacked Blue Cheese Burger and what a mistake that was. The burger was so salty it was almost uneatable. I made through about half of it before giving up. If I do eat there ever again I plan to eat only salad because now I don't trust the meat seasoning. Worse experience ever with a restaurant meal.							
366FYU4PTG5ZYG9HAGBS6K6Y0ANEK5	"I've never reviewed a flat out franchise before, but I feel compelled to because I've never been to a TGI Friday's before and, more importantly, I have too much time on my hands.  No, I didn't go to Vegas to eat at TGI Friday's. We really weren't feeling that long buffet line though. We were seated quickly and a server came out of nowhere and yelled ""Hey HEY hey."" Scared the hell out of me. I look at the menu and, unsurprisingly, most of that shit has meat in it. Even the salad! They chop up chicken and bacon in that shit. Mannn. I end up ordering this big ass potato with sauteed veggies in it. The heaviest vegetarian meal I've ever eaten. Pretty salty and really oily. Not really a complain, just something I noticed.   Server was fine, food was adequate, I guess. I'll probably never come back. There's gotta be better restaurants in Las Vegas that aren't in smoke-filled casinos."							
3NRZ1LDP7WMYK2XTJVUDNBTFIQ2ZPX	"I've only been here once and it was delicious!  I was staying in Vegas and got tired of eating at the casinos so my friend and I drove around looking for a place to eat when we saw a sign for Maggiano's.  He had been to one in LA before so we gave this one a try.  We were seated right away and, being the klutz that I normally am, I spilled my water all over the table.  Our waiter was super nice and friendly and joked around about it (aka he teased me).  He brought us bread right away and when I spilled water on that, he brought us another basket without us having to ask!   I ordered the garlic shrimp linguine and my friend ordered the braised beef canneloni.  We both loved our meals but I think I filled up on bread so I couldn't finish.  We didn't have room in tiny mini fridge in our hotel room so we didn't take home any leftovers; our waiter seemed almost hurt by our almost full plates of food.  I usually don't like creamy sauces but my pasta was very delicious and flavorful and the shrimp was cooked perfectly (I find that with pasta, the shrimp is often overcooked).    The decor was excellent and everything looked very clean.  I didn't expect much from a restaurant on the second floor of a mall but it was amazing.  I will definitely try and come back here."							
3VO4XFFP152004S20DHJWWQQDTAQ7M	I've only been here once and man i don't know how i never been here before.  It's a very nicely decorated restaurant that feels pretty fancy but it actually isn't that expensive.  We had a large group that got the family style dinner.  It was fantastic! everything was delicious and we were able to take home boxes of left overs.  it was like a buffet that was brought over to you.  large portions so you'll definitely get your moneys worth!  bring your eatin pants							
31MBOZ6PAO7VLO7LZPHYVWJA4YECLC	"I've seen Maggianos in other cities, but this was my first time dining at one.  We decided to have our meal ""family style"" which was recommend by my brother and his fiancee.     The food was pretty good, in particular we enjoyed the mussels and loved  the Tiramisu.  Our server was excellent.  They also have some reasonably priced wines available.  I've heard mixed things about this chain, but was pretty impressed with my visit.  Family style definitely seems to be the way to go when dining here."							
3XABXM4AJ1L40IXLAI9PAWMLODGQ89	"If they are open for business, it is busy! Simple as that. The food is amazing and the crowds come here to show their love! We did not have a reso, came for a late lunch on a Wed and got in no prob around 130pm. We had the best waitress in the world and from where we live north of the border at times, this can be hard to come by! Was really pleased with the service! I ordered the shrimp scampi and it was done to perfection with succulent shrimp all over the plate. The pasta cooked perfectly al dente. Large shrimps , I must have had about a dozen of them mixed amongst the butter, lemon and halved cherry tomatoes. My mom's salad (Caprese) was to die for and even though mom had requested salad dressing on the side and it was mixed in, she just let it go and did not say a peep. When our waitress had come over to check on us, she saw the error right away as she had not delivered the food to us. She asked if we would like the salad remade, that it was perfectly fine for her to do that for us! We delcined, but nice touch! The salad was HUGE! Super fresh and tasty, loaded with all the good stuff that makes a salad sing. The bread that came with the meal = cooked on site, very good as well. We were too full for dessert but got to bring half my scampi to the hotel with me. Great value, incredible food and top-notch service. With so many dining options available in Vegas we do not usually go to the same place twice but Maggiano's just hits the spot for greatness and we will return again and again! Gotta love the Frank Sinatra music!"							
3AFT28WXLFIU4CWI4RTCYGLZC84OI8	"If you'd like a light lunch - don't come here - one serve of a main pasta dish will feed a family of 4 for a month!!  Serving sizes aside, the food is pretty good; heaps of flavour, fresh herbs and all that good stuff.  Try the specialty flatbreads - kinda like a small pizza with some superb combinations on top (we had the margharita (sp) with tiny tomatoes, basil and the addition of spicy sausage.  There are plenty of wines by the glass including an Oz wine or 2.  Nice place overlooking the strip, and being right down one end it doesn't seem to be as over-subscribed as some."							
3DW3BNF1GHYW5QT2WH3ZGJLT55W8VM	"If you're in the mood for overly-salted ""Italian"" food crafted specifically for the purpose of an American tourist palate and appetite, then please, come to Maggiano's Little Italy. It's helpfully located in the Fashion Show Mall as to beckon the tourists who cannot afford or do not know what *real* (and when I say real, I mean decent) Italian food is.   I ventured here with a $25 gift card for lunch. My intent was to have the following: a tasty adult beverage, a soup, and a main dish. Being that one of my favorite Italian dishes (Linguine Clams) was on the menu I knew I would order it.   First off I arrived a la solo, which I don't think should be weird, especially for lunch these days. Of course, the hostess attempted to seat me at the bar, to which I declined politely and was lead to a table in the dining area. Impressions: at least it is well-lit during the daytime hours with plenty of windows for viewing the surrounding strip attractions. However, table cloths were rumpled, salt and pepper shakers had a waxy build-up on them. This comes from a restaurant wiping them down with nothing but a damp towel. I should know, I was a server in college.   Starters - I ordered a Peach Bellini and my server brought bread. Sad, pitiful (but at least warm) bread. He did not pour my EVOO (which is on the table), nor did he offer me any balsamic. Yet, as I watched around me, servers plated EVOO and balsamic for THEIR tables. The Peach Bellini arrived in a martini glass. I was disappointed in that, and then even further disappointed that my peach Bellini was not garnished at all and it had no actual fruit in it. It was overly sweet, and not worth $9.    Soup ($3) - I ordered the Creamy Chicken Potato soup. It was salt. Salt. Salt. Salt. The vegetables were obviously of the frozen variety, and the presentation was horrific. The soup had spilled over the side of the cup and they hadn't bothered to at least wipe it.   Linguine Clams with Red Sauce ($15.95) - This dish should be called Linguine with clams because there was barely a trace of sauce in my bowl/plate. There were so many noodles I thought the waiter had served me a portion for three people. I get it, this is a ""family style"" place, but for lunch portions also? Also: SALT, SALT, SALT. The dishes here are obviously doctored to an ""Americanized"" ""Iodized"" diet. Hefty in portions and in salt. I could barely stomach my noddles and although the clams were decent, there was no ""seafood/brine"" taste to this dish that SHOULD be there. Comparing this Linguine Clams to others I have eaten (mainly at Chicago Joes downtown), well I just cannot even compare the two.   They do not make lunch portions. The lunch is just a shortened menu of their dinner. You get ginormous dinner portions and you pay the same amount of money. it's honestly a tourist-trap rip-off.  I am sure the better ratings of this place are coming from tourists. But being a local I can only offer this advice: there are much better Italian places in town. Find them and stay away from Maggianos.  Thank goodness I had a gift card."							
3PEG1BH7AE71RDXX0P925C0DXDABK2	"If you're looking for a delicious cafe/diner type of breakfast/lunch place with good prices, then go to First Watch in midtown Phoenix.  The food and coffee and is fantastic, I've never had a bad meal their. Probably one of my favorite places to go for Eggs Benedict. Every server I've ever had there has been on point, and smiling. I thought it was surprisingly cheap for how good the food was. Lots of variety and choices on the menu.   Easy access and plenty of parking."							
3W31J70BASCK1IP3EP5XGW6VFY9CK9	"If you're looking for Serbian food in Las Vegas this is THE place to go.  Even if you don't care (or know) what Serbian food is, and if you're just looking for a huge plate o' meat, this is also THE place to go.  Serbians really, really love meat.  Like, all meat, all the time.  When I go to Prince, I'm usually with Serbs and we order the plate of meat for two (it's enough for at least three people).  It includes cevapi (Serbian national dish, looks like ground beef sausage links), chicken, beef, pork, and some cheese-stuffed thing I have yet to identify.  It's really good when you're in the mood for a serious dose of protein.  I've also ordered  the beef soup which, literally, includes like a pound of smoky beef roast.  It's insane.  You will leave this place doubled over in pain from the amount of meat you consumed.  I guarantee it.  This would probably be a great place for body builders to eat.  The only downside to Prince is that I always feel really intimidated walking in.  The restaurant is dimly lit inside and it sometimes feels like a ""Serbian only"" atmosphere.  But, if you feel self-conscious, just go outside to the patio seating and chow down on your cevapi.  The waiters are really nice and will make you feel welcome.  It's definitely an experience."							
3RBI0I35XEJR8NI1PBVNW1HC7063YY	"IHOP isn't bad, it's just not that good either.  I used to think IHOP was much better several years ago.  They still have good pancakes and French toast, but unfortunately I don't think they do well with most other dishes especially outside of breakfast.  The sausage seems like it was not cooked, but more like boiled or something.  Hashbrowns were also pretty good I guess, but generally I can get just as good or better at several other resturants.  Just seems like the overall quality of the food and service just isn't what it used to be.  I would actually rather go to even Denny's these days, whereas a few years ago I would have chosen IHOP first.  They seemed to remove several items off the menu that I loved.  This time around I didn't see any types of skillets on the menu which is dissapointing for me because that is one of my favorite breakfast options.  The quality of the food is down, and the price of the food is a bit high considering the lower quality.  Also just want to add a comment about the service.  We were seated in a corner and none of the servers noticed us for nearly 10 minutes.  Not exactly the best service, they should be able to do much better."							
3OJX0UFJ0ZNW6GNCWJZ8KTELB45U98	II have a gluten problem and have celiac disease i have been to this restraunt several times over 25 times.The food is very good.However if you have an allergy or a gluten problem i can no longer suggest  this restraunt.The last 2 out of 4 times i had eaten there they brought me out my salad with croutins in the salad which some of you who have the problem becomes a big problem. Thank god i caught this before i ate it. I ordered my meal through the chef per usual 2 times they brought me out items that have gluten out of the last 4 times i ate there.The problem is they have no checking sytem there.A diffrent waiter brings out your food .They have no idea whats going on.The margin for era is to great.They say they accomodate allergies and gluten free. The problem is the caring level is not there anymore in this place.Note both times this happened at the restraunt it was not a weekend or that busy.So that excuse is down the drain.My question to the manger was what if this was a child that had a serius allergy and went into shock.Then what.He said it never happens.My response funny to me i was here 3 weeks ago and the same thing happened. there was no response.							
3R6RZGK0XFSBKWKK9L1TFW9VYKYVYM	"In a city full of great Mexican restaurants it's hard to differentiate yourself from the crowd. Let's admit it, we all have our favorites... so we had to admit being a bit jaded when asked to try Caldero by a friend. (okay we admit, we even put off going for a few weeks). We were wrong, and we fully admit our mistake... see we can act maturely! Located on Thomas, east of Scottsdale Rd., Caldero impressed us with their unique Mexican food at very affordable prices. Looking for the standard Americanized Mexican... you won't get that here. Instead you will find authentic regional dishes prepared with care and handed down by the owner's mother, who still oversees all the sauces. And the sauces are what sets Caldero apart from the pack. I'll let you in on one of our 'little secrets'... want to judge a Mexican Restaurant... ask to taste their Mole Sauce. If they don't offer Mole... run.  I can vouch that the Mole sauce here passed the test with flying colors, great consistency, not too sweet, right amount of kick. Yep, they had us at the Mole.  Full review here.... http://schmoozeaz.com/blog/?p=974"							
3L21G7IH47CVYK4M27H4882F9GRY10	"In addition to the outstanding food and service, the servers at the bar were friendly and showed genuine interest in new and regular customers. Their Italian food and wine selection are excellent, but this time around I tried their grilled salmon. A very busy place but worth the short wait."							
34R3P23QHSH2DQU0PV21FYX6FXNHWJ	in line at drive thru for 11 mins. so far...4 cars in frnt of me.  service a joke...12 min. til order recd.							
3INZSNUD806APECQAO9JATAXP499DC	"In Vegas for 1/2 marathon and looking for the required pre-race pasta dinner. Didn't think to check for reservations earlier and most places are booked. Went back to an old favorite and they had reservations available. I had the spaghetti with meat sauce and sausage. Huge portions. Nothing spectacular, but very tasty and filling. Husband had seafood pasta (can't recall name), which he really liked. We closed with the cheesecake. Mmmm."							
3RQVKZ7ZRKZJ8LQHY2RI0ESNXNX72Q	"It hasn't been scientifically proven; but Maggiano's may be the leading contributor to obesity in the United States. Good lord this place serves a ton of food. It was odd that I asked the waiter how big the baked zitti was off the lunch menu. He did his best to talk me out of it by saying that it was small and not that big (a half portion as he put it). This thing was huge! Full of fresh sausage, heavy sauce and noodles that could have fed three people instead of just one. We ended up getting our meal comped by the manager after a mix-up with the bill which was great and Ill definitely return when Im in town again. Great view too if you get a table near the glass."							
37OPIVELUUJ56DRXOQ69X90FNELHA9	"It seems like we end up eating here every time we come to Vegas. This time was a little different because we brought out 2-year old son. I tried to be respectful of the other people eating, so when I made the reservation I requested a table in a far corner of the restaurant. We get there and get seated and they put us at the table in the main dining area in the corner right next to the window that overlooks Wynn. We have eaten at this exact same table before, but not with a baby. Anyway we decided to stay and have a wonderful meal. The waitress was very helpful with my son, from making sure he had a cup with a lid to bringing us extra straws for him to chew on. The food was great like every other time we went. I had some type of pasta with Lobster all up in it. DAMN it was good. I savored every bite. Everyone else in our party loved the food as well. Even when my son screamed a little, it didn't seem to bother anyone else sitting around us. That may have been because we were there for reservations at 5pm and we were there for an hour and a half or so. So many of the dinner people probably would not have started getting there for another hour or so.   Great time again Maggianos, I have a feeling we will be back next time."							
3ZCC2DXSD7KSOQFPEWODMVDPG10YYY	"It seems to me that Scottsdale is severely lacking in the Mexican food arena as far as good food at reasonable prices.  Screw this table-side guacamole for $12 business.  Make it in the kitchen.  Not to say I don't order said guacamole.  But let it go on record, I disagree with it.  And I welcomed the addition of Filiberto's on Indian Bend if that tells you anything.  But I was really pleasantly surprised when I finally made it to Caldero.  They have some specialty dishes on the dinner menu that look quite good, but we were there for lunch, so I ordered from the ""classics"" menu.  And truthfully, if you can't make a taco, I'm not interested in moving forward in this relationship.  Chips and salsa are still free!  That's no longer a given sadly.  The red salsa was good with plenty of oregano and just the right kick for me.  The green was a queso dip, and would make a lovely beverage as far as I'm concerned.  For lunch, I had the chile rojo burro served enchilada style with rice and beans for $8!  Did I mention this is in Scottsdale?  Hopefully they don't talk to the table-side guac folks.  The burro was so stuffed with pork, I almost wished it had a little more sauce though.  I loved the enchilada sauce, too.  I went with charro beans...again delicious...over black or refried.  They also offer lemon cilantro rice in addition to the standard Spanish rice.  I had Spanish, and it was just fine...except for the obligatory peas everyone tosses in there.  Our server was excellent and very friendly, too!  I'm a little worried it was relatively empty on a Saturday afternoon.  But I'll be back and do my part in ensuring it stays open."							
3X878VYTIEY39F2TMX6PKXMC6R2F7I	"It was a sad, sad morning when I realized that with my newly gluten-free-ness, I couldn't run to greasy pizza as a hangover remedy.  I was soooo so happy to find Maggiano's though!  The BF and I were on a quest, and we came across the menu that graciously advertised gluten-free pasta, so in we went.  The server was a SUPER HAPPY fella, who brought the chef over to customize my meal basically however I wanted!  I ended up with some baked corn pasta with chicken, marinara sauce and cheese - DELICIOUS!!   It's classy inside, but the lunch prices were totally fine (for Vegas standards, that is), plus the portions were huge.  The waiter kept our water coming and even gave the BF two glasses at a time ;)"							
3566S7OX5DZCJ08LFYR4VVII5HJ719	It was my first time there and I have to say that I love the atmosphere. It is very open yet intimate. Our server was awesome and the food is Amazing! The only complaint I have is the tiramisu was well below average.							
3X0EMNLXEP5HBISJIY5A25GJUFVVPS	"It was my wedding rehearsal dinner and I really wanted tapas for all the different tastebuds attending.  It's also sports/video poker bar, so not a romantic setting, but I didn't mind.  Some of my guests wanted to gamble anyway.  The executive chef, Oscar Sanchez, and the manager, Lisa, took real good care of me.  We went over the menu, the timing of the dishes, the different diets in our group, and I even was able to order dishes not on the menu.  How accommodating!  The service was impeccable, the prices reasonable, and the presentation mouth-watering.  Everyone attending was impressed with the entire experience and left with happy bellies.  Thank you, Toros, for taking care of us.  I'll always visit when I'm in town!"							
3BO3NEOQM0X5282HU8OUXL1UNRZIA2	"It was New Year's Day, and another visit to Maggiano's.  This dinner really started the year off right!    Rustic bread was very good, and golden Calamari Fritte was again excellent alternately dipped in a specially requested Lemon Aioli, along with a mild Marinara Sauce.  A filling bowl of Tuscan Chicken Sausage & Orzo Soup was outstanding, and a small chopped Caesar Salad with a light and delicious Creamy Caesar Dressing, big crunchy croutons, and Parmesan splinters was nice and cool.  Although we had to ask for one round of water refills, and Meat Sauce was first mistakenly brought to Diane's side of our booth, these minor lapses were quickly corrected, and otherwise service was excellent, as is usually the case here.  My entree of Spaghetti & Meatball in Meat Sauce was very fine indeed, with a large dense meatball, al dente spaghetti, and a mild sweet sauce.  For Diane, Roasted Red Potatoes served on request in lieu of pasta were simply prepared and excellent tasting.  I asked for a few mushrooms to be added to my Meat Sauce, and they were.  There was no charge levied for this or the aioli, although I would have gladly paid for these graciously given extras.  Once again, five-star dining--on a holiday, when expectations are highest.  This time they were even exceeded!"							
3Z56AA6EK4GQBPG5PA5A996P8HU6MH	"It was ok I guess. I had the huevos rancheros, hubby had the traditional breakfast.  For me - the beans tasted like canned beans, the tortilla tasted store bought like mission tortillas & the chorizo was a tablespoon so more beans than anything. My over-easy eggs, sliced avocados & potatoes were probably the only thing fresh. Oh, and the pico de gallo was pretty good. So overall it was alright for the amount of serving you get & $. If you're starving it'll fill you up. Most likely won't visit again. Husband said it was bland but did the job (after adding salt, pepper & hot sauce) since he was starving.  Apart from the food, the service surpassed the food! :)"							
34KYK9TV2ROZFWA55YI4WYRNE7NBSJ	"It would be hard to wax lyrically about the food at the Huether because it takes far too long for the food to come. If we weren't celebrating a birthday we would have left. Seriously doubting a return visit. Perhaps they need a bigger kitchen or serve fewer people. In any case it's been an hour, it's Friday night and our appetizer hasn't made it to the table."							
3JUDR1D0D67TE3VWU10O059I2DOQ26	"It's ""TAPAS,"" not ""TOPLESS.""  This restaurant located at the corner of W. Charleston and Desert Foothills opened on November 1st, brought to us by the same group who run John Cutter right next door.   I enjoy tapas places because you get to sample lots of small plates, ordering more of those you like.  It's a mini-buffet that comes to your table.  Our group of four ordered: -bacon wrapped dates:  unlike another tapas place in town, these are really dates wrapped in bacon.  The dates are not stuffed with anything except their own sweetness.  Solid. -meatballs:  I needed a dish with more protein, so I ordered these.  Nothing spectacular. -bread and butter:  carbs!   -oxtail:  my favorite dish of the night, which I only had to share with one friend.  I could have had another order all to myself.  Fall-off-the-bone meat and a nice sauce to go with it. -ahi:  I'm allergic to fish, so I only looked at this.  The friends liked it. -garlic shrimp:  I had one.  Nothing special. -asparagus:  this was another winner for me.  The grilled spears tasted great. -croquetas:  deep-fried cream cheese, bechamel sauce, and ham (I think)--what's not to like?  I liked. -manchego cheese:  served in three chunks with some toasted bread on the side.  I like this cheese, but wish it had been sliced for us, or at least give us a cheese slicer so we can do it ourselves. -Serrano ham:  too salty, but that's just me. -flan:  YUM!  The sauce has cinnamon in it.  My pal could have done without the cinnamon, but I loved it.  I also had a glass of the red sangria, which was not too strong, just the way I like it. Our server, Omar, was very attentive the whole night and the food came out very quickly. The bar in the middle of the room has video poker machines and there are several flat screen TVs throughout the restaurant, so this is a great place to come and watch sports in a non-smoking environment and with good food that isn't your typical bar fare. Overall, a great time was had by all.  It's a welcome addition for the locals who live in the neighborhood and we'll definitely be back."							
3DFYDSXB2WGLCS0LIVQL9NSO79HJUS	it's a healthy breakfast all day looking joint.  Remind me of sunrise cafe in Vegas.   very friendly service and prompt.  Definitely a good spot to go.							
338431Z1FLV7XBZ1UENLC8MQZ4NROF	"It's a national chain, so if you've been to one you've been to them all. But, the good thing about higher-end chain restaurants is that they're consistent. And, in the case of Maggiano's, they're consistently good, for the most part, and a good value.  My wife had a gift card to their family of restaurants, which included Chili's and Macaroni Grill. Naturally, we chose the best of the lot -- Maggiano's. Located in Fashion Show mall, it's a pain to find the entrance. Walking through the mall, you have to actually walk outside of the mall towards the Strip and head to the second level via the outdoor escalators to find the main entrance.  This was a family outing for us -- our three year old son in tow -- so we were happy to be seated at a booth. They've got a kid's menu with the usual stuff (pizza, chicken fingers, mac-n-cheese, etc). For $5.95 kids get an entree, beverage, and a dessert (lemon cookies or vanilla ice cream). My kid opted for the pizza. It's a long, rectangular, crispy cheese flatbread pizza cut into triangles. Tasty and large enough for two kids to share.  The lasagna was the best item of the night. A huge brick shape filled with crumbled meatballs and Italian sausage and covered in meat sauce. The gnocchi also came in a large portion, good enough for two people. While it was a little too dense, it was a passable version of the dish that came with spicy Italian sausage and a creamy (oversauced) vodka sauce.  They have small dessert options for $2.95. The chocolate cake was decent. A little too cold and firm, but it hit the spot. We also opted for the lemoncello pie ($7) -- essentially a circular key lime pie with cherries garnishing the plate and topped with whipped cream and almond slivers.  While not the best Italian food in the city, Maggiano's does make for a good family restaurant at a decent price, considering its location.  3.5 Stars"							
3XAOZ9UYRZ7MPID0BX0AVMZDA7B1Q1	"It's bland old white people food, if you like that sort of thing ;) Sort of like a more pricey version of Denny's."							
3QXFBUZ4ZKWBLQAKAP5ICA08FH0GUL	"It's friday, I'm starving in my room after playing ""the secret world"" for 5 hrs; I decided to check yelp for something different.  I've found this little niche near my place without pics and decided I've give it proper pictures. We all know without pics we're not going.  I parked in the back because driving by in the afternoon sunset was difficult to see. Really must pay attention.  The restaurant is cozy, clean, and the manager who greeted me was friendly; along with the staff.  Since this is the first time being in a Serbian I asked to try their traditional foods. ""stuffed cabbage(beef, rice and no tomatoes)"", ""cucumber salad with tomato and feta cheese"", and ""cordon bleu""(baked stuffed pork(homemade cheese, and ham with sour creme) along with a special homemade dipping sauce(bell peppers, tomato, garlic all hand chopped and cooked really long to make it pasty and pure).  Appetizers are around 7ish and entrees are about 15ish.   overall, the stuffed cabbage and cordon bleu hit the spot. :)  Anyways check out the pics and if you want to try some European Serbian food this is the spot.   4 stars meets my standards for cleanliness, atmosphere and the only Serbian restaurant I know out there so I cannot compare."							
3OID399FXGNJQO33DA9BKPW8S25FDB	"It's like every other Maggianos, but it's on the Strip  in the Fashion Show Mall which means it's BEYOND BUSY  1 piece of advice : MAKE A RESERVATION Unless you'd like to sit at the bar but even then, it might take them forever and a day to get to you. Even though it was busy are service was efficient & fast.  Probably won't be coming back to this location since we were in Vegas just for the weekend, plus it was WAY too crowded for my liking.  On the plus: complimentary bread, & splitting meals isn't a big deal"							
367O8HRHKGOFUXPWQJ8HOKLH4F64S6	"It's safe to say, I'm a Maggiano's regular. & I think the Vegas location is probably the best one- overlooking the Strip, yet safely located in the Fashion Show mall & not quite 'on the Strip'. Fun for people watching during the day (love sitting outside, if not too cold, hot or windy!) then transforms at nite when the 2 windowed walls facing the Strip allow you to dine alongside the buzz & beauty of the Vegas lights. While ambiance is a factor in why I like Maggiano's, consistency is the reason I go back time & time again. I don't believe I've ever had a bad meal or experience there (other than occasionally being sardined on busier nites). Unbeknownst to me, at some point, Maggiano's even changed ownership; I couldn't tell, because unlike other cases when there's an ownership change, nothing about the quality changed. I'm part of their email list so I get emails with coupons every couple months. A few no-fails on the menu: tomato caprese, stuffed mushrooms, rigatoni d (though not great for leftovers, because of the cream sauce), mom's lasagna (had it for the 1st time last nite & it's one of the best, not too mushy), eggplant parm (generous portion), the best chicken parm I've ever graced my mouth with & linguine di mare (substantial seafood). For dessert, if you're still feeling gluttonous, go for the apple crostada... otherwise, we generally get the kids scoop of vanilla bean icecream with hot fudge. Also, keep Maggiano's in mind for Thanksgiving & Christmas dining, if you're in town visiting or if you just don't feel like cooking- they do a wonderful job with the menus & you'll surely have leftovers, for a reasonable price. It's easy to mosey in & be seated right away for lunch but I recommend reservations for any time after 4:00."							
3R16PJFTS37H6ECOLAZFXYU7NLT4KP	Italian is not always my favorite because it typically involves a lot of carbs..  I am best staying away from it.  Of course I always manage to order anything but pasta so I am probably missing the best part.  I've been here a few times and never been there without a 30 min wait.  Nevertheless I enjoyed the service and the food each time I've been there.  It's not cheap but you will for sure leave with a very full stomach.   Personally I find the musicians performance somewhat annoying.  Maybe because I have always come here with a group and it's hard to have a conversation with that in the background.  I am not sure if I was on a honeymoon I would like it either.  Just not working for me.							
37M4O367VJYUSLGRKRV5H3SPCMJM5H	Its been a few years since I ate here and I was shopping and hungry so there ya go. It was about 12 on a Sunday. No wait for a table. They sat me and my little guy down at a nice table in the corner. I ordered a very tasty raspberry iced tea and had one of the specials. it was a crap and sweet shrimp fondue with several toasty wedges to scoop up the fondue. Ryder had the angel hair pasta with olive oil and cheese sprinkled on it. We both dug right in when it arrived..which it did very fast. I would give this 5 stars but the server let my tea run out and didnt refill it for about 10minutes after it was empty. Not a huge deal but the tea was really good and I would have drank 3 glasses of it..but I had 2. She was also a bit slow with getting us the check and bringing me the change.  I will have to let that slide tho since the food was top notch.							
38DCH97KHHITKZT41M6GZMVZ4OAQJT	Its great place to dine. Classy with affordable prices. The food s wonderful. Will always recommend to everybody to experience the best Italian fine or casual dining.							
31D0ZWOD0AFUVDL1QIZORH1Y1XIA0Z	Ive been 4 times it think last time was yesterday....  OK so the Good........some good creative menu choices....ah a Fajitas crepe was interesting....   BAd:  Bugs on table....straw wrapper in water? (-1 star)  traditional food Eggs Benedick.... terribly bland....and different food that Fajita crepe thing also not good.....(-1 star)   Hours....um close at 2:30pm? I give points for havening long hours and good food this place has neither....(-1 star)  It not the worst but I can't recommend it anymore....							
31SIZS5W59VAINCH9RFP1DHQE55RQN	"Just got back from a wedding in Vegas where the reception was held at Maggiano's. The atmosphere inside is elegant, but comfortable. The private room was perfect in size with a large bar at the front and a balcony overlooking the strip. The service during the reception was stellar. I told our bartender/server about my gluten allergy and she was immediately able to identify substitutions and alternate courses for me that would meet my needs. She knew exactly what to do and made me feel at ease right away. I had an awesome chopped salad to start with that made the other non-gluten free people around me jealous. Then I enjoyed marsala mushroom and chicken gluten free pasta. Oh my God, it was out of this world. I need to go to the Maggiano's and Tampa ASAP to have this again. Finally for dessert, I had the creme brulee, again making everyone around me jealous. The meal was unbelievable!! Kudos to the staff and chef at Maggiano's for making the whole night perfect both for guests and for the bride and groom. I have not visited an Italian restaurant since I learned of my allergy but now I absolutely have to go back to Maggiano's.  If you are in Vegas, definitely make this a dinner spot at least one night of your stay."							
30EMX9PEVKZ08ZEZBBVXV1AD11VKSB	Just returned from a trip to Barcelona and Marbella and my husband and I found the food to be very authentic! We also live down on the strip and have been regulars over at Julien Serrano (Aria); the food at Toros rivals the taste and quality but is significantly cheaper. The menu has a lot of variety but not too much where you get lost. We liked that it was a very relaxed and casual atmosphere making it perfect to just stop by.   It was obvious from the service that the restaurant had just opened and waiters/waitresses were not fully familiar with the menu etc but they were very friendly and polite! I'm sure these issues will be resolved very quickly as they are to be expected in a new restaurant!   We are very excited about this restaurant and looking forward to it being a regular spot for us.							
3OQQD2WO8IM5IN3WLT9KADNOHH7I36	"Just terrible. Sat down and didn't see a server for 10 minutes. Took our orders and had to track her down afterwards.  The salad was HORRIBLE and was so limp, i couldn't pierce it with my fork.  After asking and being informed that they had one large hopper of lettuce, she even asked if i wanted another salad. HELLO!!!!! It's the same lettuce!!!!!! Just bad bad bad all around."							
3TD33TP5DLIVF0OBOYWDBYXHS1GBAN	"Just witnessed a few Duck Dynasty looking bikers wielding foot long army knives reach over the bar, grabbed bottles of alcohol, and walked out.  But it gets better...they walked back in, sit down at the bar, and are getting served shots.  With 1 waitress, 1 female bartender, and 1 bus boy manning shop, not sure if they saw it or just ignoring it.  Either way, I would not recommend bringing your kids or date here.   On the food: Braised oxtail is good  Scallops so-so  Seared prawns were sent back as all of them were mushy and rotting.  Even the Buser said it stinks when he took it away  This place doesn't seem like it would be around after another few months"							
3LN3BXKGC0BODUZP5PKJUYL50XAWGZ	"Last night my husband and I was treated to dinner by our kids here at Maggiano's in Fashion Show Mall and the dinner was great. Everyone had something different and all the dishes were great. My husband who is also a chef had no complaints, which is very rare, he had Clams & Linguine, the sauce was surely a hit with everyone at the table ( we all sampled each others dishes lol), I had the Chicken Francese, the chicken was tender and juicy, loved the butter sauce and the crispy Potatoes. The kids ate Lasagna and Chicken Parmesan both equally good! Our appetizer was the Mozzarella & Marinara very good sauce. The lack of a fifth star was not because of food but the wait we had even with our reservation. But with good food you must expect a crowd and the wait was worth it. We also had a table with a great view of the Las Vegas strip!"							
3PKJ68EHDNCG76U1IWJMQ83YD1FJHR	"Last night was my first time at this restaurant, as I live on the other side of town.  First, I must say that last night's background music was fantastic, a great mixture of 80s and 90s, which was nice, as I did not feel like I was dining in a club on the Strip.  Next, service was friendly and for the most part attentive.  And the food, well we ordered sliders (good), garlic shrimp (good), calamari (good).  The dish I liked the least was the potatoes, but I think that's just about preference.  I have read the other reviews about the bacon wrapped dates, and I must say that although I understand they don't include a nut in theirs, like those at Firefly or Jaleo, I prefer it with the nut.  Again, just preference.  I thought the portions were adequate to good, and I think their prices are not much higher and/or comparable to other tapas places.  Tapas places in general tend to be higher in price, and the bill does add up as you order plates and drinks.  Overall, I thought the place was good."							
302U8RURJZHH8XG62JSIYGBOU0UVNW	"Last visit to vegas went to the one at the aliante, which I would say is better overall esp in service and atmosphere. Got the $10 unlmtd app- potato skin & buffalo wings. Potato skins couldve had more on them, and when I bit into a rotten skinned one and asked to get something else since they're all $10 I was told no but could get a new order. Dissapointing. Waitress was pretty good but the atmosphere of an older group staring@ me & my husband was akward. Is it cuz we r interracial? Got more food than u? Idk... but made me u comfortable. Went at 1am btw. And all potato skin orders had @ least 1 rotten skinned spot on a potato. Not too good wont suggest that to anyone. Beach bum drink (alcoholic) sucked. Mostly pineapple juice & no garnishes.   Wings were good and so were the ultimate grand margaritas. Prob wont come again though"							
3M67TQBQQH4CR79EQEIHKS2R41D9AB	"Let me start with I ate my whole meal as well as my parents! I ordered sareala w/ langostinos! They brought out my plate with lots of seafood but no langostinos to be found. When I asked the waiter, he returned to tell me the shrimp were the langostinos!  I said no those are shrimp. The waiter then returned to the kitchen and apologized to me stating they had substituted the jumbo shrimp in without telling me. I said I wish I was told ahead of ordering. Then I was approached by the manager who presented me with the same lie about the jumbo prawns being langostinos!  I corrected him w a simple google search and he apologized!  Then after waiting fifteen minutes for the owner to visit our table as asked by the manager, we were presented a bill and no visit from the owner. We asked the waiter to remove the meal that was misrepresented to us. Finally the owner came over to the table, who immediately was argumentative and even a little threatening to my father! He started the conversation with""you ate the shrimp did you not? "" I simply said my complaint wasn't that it was good or inedible,  but that I was promised and lied to twice about the langostinos.  The owner countered his original shrimp statement and said that I got the other kind of langostinos without claws. So now I'm lied to three times. When we simlly asked if that was his stance, he snatched the bill and removed the meal. At no point did the owner even try to solve or listen to what our actual complaint was. To top everything off with this, the owner followed my father out in a manner that was very aggressive!  This is not a place to eat and very overpriced for what you get!"							
36818Z1KV3TQC5KY95H7TFZ5493A3V	Let's make this short and sweet...  Service - very poor Food - average Will I come back? - NO							
36BTXXLZ2VO3TIPJBU8CYAGLIDMR44	Long line so I expected something spectacular. It was just average Italian food with a high price.							
3U74KRR67M12V5CHXOS3XYN3XFETNE	Long wait on a Veteran's day weekend. Almost 2 hours wait!!! =( but the steak was good.. and the appetizers. Mozerella Marinara and the Center Cut Filet Mignon..yum							
3YLTXLH3DFMCTHXZD9O6N4PAM0LHPP	"Love , love , lovvveee the foood . I would eat there everyday if I could ! Everything is made from scratch no presevatives , no frozen food. Tastes awesome :) I had the beef tenderloin with a side of mash potatoes and Asparagus, and the spinach artichoke appetizer to start with. Couldnt finish off with desert this time "" way too full "" but Ive had the Tiramisu in the past and its devine !"							
3ZURAPD2883PYTNRXHPGJNVZ352F1L	LOVE IT!! food was delicious.							
324N5FAHSXRG0RV356026OUK05PKVG	"Love love love China Chili. We've been searching for a good Chinese food place for years ever since our old standby closed down and we've finally located a winner! My favorite is the Mongolian chicken, crab puffs, and fried rice. The service is prompt and the place is huge and comfortable. One of our new favorites!"							
3IH9TRB0FBF98KPHYPV1MK8RJXUI1F	"Love love love Maggianos! The service is always fantastic, the food is even better, and the drinks never disappoint. The patio has a nice little view of the Wynn and the strip. Maggianos never disappoints!"							
3GMLHYZ0LEDB7HVK4VROJA7CKDPYU0	Love Maggianos! Great italian food has never tasted so good. Portions are large so be sure to eat family style. We took our 1 1/2 old daughter and she even loved the place. Seating can be really busy but don't worry as the food makes up for it! Prices are reasonable and not over the board so it's definitely a place to visit. Great location in the middle of the strip and at the mall!							
39XCQ6V3KYKS3IVZXBOOS7V3MM465R	"Love stopping here for a quick drink and tasty appetizer.  The gnocchi is consistently spot on, delicious!  Friendly, prompt service and outdoor patio seating...just hold on to your hats on windy days!  Overall, I always look forward to winding down here :)"							
31ODACBENUVMJ2CUOGFURNMM07NQS9	"Love the food here, it's extremely good, and I definitely recommend the daily specials. The outdoor patio is fantastic and as there's few places on the strip where you can eat outdoors, this is a great option for dining al fresco. Service is good, but it can take a while for your food to arrive.  One of the reasons I chose this place is that they will prepare your dish gluten free on request, if you ask. They also can substitute regular pasta with gluten free pasta.  Good selection of wines by the glass, but it's rather expensive. $16 a glass is out of my league. However, they do have a happy hour from 3pm to 6pm Mon-Fri with a selection of beer, wines and cocktails for $6 or less.  More on gluten free in Las Vegas:  https://www.facebook.com/groups/gluten.free.las.vegas/"							
3MGHRFQY2L5VRVJ46OD4U3J54OM0Y0	"Love the food here, this is our go to place  for lunch or fast take out dinner. Do not get this place confused with Georges on McKellips  and Miller with failing health inspections."							
3909MD9T2ZXOIUH395KVQ7ETSE5FE3	"Love the happy hour!  This T.G.l Fridays is located in the Orleans Casino which is the closes one to me because I live in the far South West of Las Vegas. First impressions cute place, my boyfriend and I were seated by the bar area in these cute little booths perfect for 2 people. I didn't know it but I went during happy which was awesome, they had a small but nice selection of half off drinks and appetizers. The customer service here was awesome, our waiter wow! I even think he was a trainee maybe thats why he was so nice. Usually I don't fall for up sales but this guy could talk. So he up sold me into ordering some onion soup. Which was delicious, I love onion soup but T.G.I fridays recipe was a lot different then the onion soups I've been eating idk it was delish! I order a tomato basil pasta that my friend suggested me. The portions were huge! which is totally okay with me I love taking home left overs. In total two entree's a few shrimp cocktails, drinks, and onion soup came out to about $70 for two. Decent price for a great date night."							
3D3B8GE8927JEBFGFX0EANRM3NC9PQ	"Love this neighborhood joint.  They recently revised their menu. Although I miss some of the old menu, their current selections are quite tasty.  I really love their bacon wrapped dates and Tempranillo wine. Their sliders and stuffed piquillo peppers are worth a try! This is a nice, causal, laid back restaurant. For an added bonus, they have lots of TVs. I will definitely be back for football season."							
3ZXV7Q5FJB49LWXPDEE00JEQ72SFCA	"Love this place! The chef comes out to greet you! He remembered that I was a gestational diabetic and made sure he made the food for my needs! Also, you can get a gambling card and they give you a free $25 when you hit a 100 credits... I hit that in 20 minutes!"							
3WA2XVDZEMXSZ1OS8CHRW11GZF3E60	"Love this place. Service was great, we came and got seated right away, very attentive and helpful waitress/waiter. Like the atmosphere as well, as I can see the Palazzo/Venetian hotel. Ordered the shrimp and crab canneloni and it tastes amazing. I can savor every bit of crab and shrimp in it plus the cheese and special sauce that they use, so good. See you soon Little Maggiano thanks for the delicous dinner.."							
3YCT0L9OMMP1G5Z28ONDNTRHVW0SNO	"Love, love, love this location. We recently had our wedding reception here for 50 guests. I cannot describe how perfect everything went; from the ambiance, decor, to the food. All our guests loved every minute and will eat here every time they visit Vegas from now on. Thank you Maggiano's!"							
3QMELQS6Y5RH85TXUI1RV80ZE4T6R5	"Loved it ..wife and i looking for place to eat as we were going up and down Scottsdale rd lucky she noticed the sign and we turned on thomas and pulled in..was impressed at decor new and nice..Hostess was very helpful in giving suggestions, server was also great. the owner gave us sample of their Caldera Margarita. whoohoo spicy.. we had regular Margs instead..the food was outstanding..chips and salsa to start , bean dip, and a green chile queso. wow..then we shared some apps that were on special for sunday evening..Had and awesome dinner with drinks for less than $50. cant say enough good things..they are new just opened couple months again..we really wish them luck wish was closer to home , but we will be back.. Nice bar and TVs."							
3NC6WP7WJH0KAGPPKUO1G17TUL1WWZ	"Loved it! Good atmosphere, great fooooood! oh and the dessert! yes.   Now.. there was a odd conversation we overheard about a guy who was name dropping a whole bunch, as if he was some high roller, other than that, loved the restaurant, service and food!"							
3ATYLI1PRTIQZNGOM9ECAH0ZPNTJOF	"Loved it!! My wife and I were both VERY pleased with our dinners and our time here at Maggiano's.  We had about a 15 minute wait for a table, which was no big deal.  Once seated we were greeted by our server.  A kind Italian man, who was very efficient.  This place was extremely clean with a wonderful atmosphere.    This may be a chain, but I didn't know that until reading reviews before I posted my own.  They do not come off as a chain restaurant to me.  Now compare them to Olive Garden....Not really anything to compare!!  Maggiano's takes it hands down.  The food was rich and tasty.  Salad was decent size, with an amazing dressing that had a touch of spiciness.  I ordered a glass of wine  as did my wife and the bill came to around $60.  Definitely worth the money!!  We will be back when we return to Vegas."							
3W9XHF7WGKB1NZRE0B0N566Z3K9TK9	Loved the look and feel of this place...would recommend for a quite dinner with that special someone.							
3IZVJEBJ6A0QAWFO4ZV4HB2YNLBZ6Q	Loved the stuff mushrooms and crab cakes!!							
3I7KR83SNATI3KI025V6E65N9D7K91	"Loved this place! First time there was a date night with husband and since we have a new baby it doesnt happen very often. Food was amazing, service was fast and the manager gave us a free dessert in celebration of the special night. Will be going back for sure."							
3BFF0DJK8XSZBI4M5K9PWSX9KEMTSQ	"Loved this place. Their food is amazing. We had the lobster carbonara, and one of their vegetarian ravioli dishes on their make a wish menu. Both were very tasty. Plates range from about 12-20 on average. The steak dishes are about double that. The chocolate cake is a must!"							
3BS6ERDL93NN7VASCH67QJJVZ31D65	"Ma-Ma-Ma-Maggiano's I sure love you!  Why? Because you make my tummy happy!  I have been going to Maggiano's on and off since the Las Vegas location opened.  I had never heard of the chain before because I am not really an Italian food fan and tend not to notice those restaurants around town.  I went here for the first time for a friend's birthday dinner a while back and have been hooked ever since!    Before Maggiano's, I was a pasta hater.  I know, I know, I am a weirdo, but I just wasn't into any pasta.  I would only eat it if I had to, but it was never a first, second, or third choice for me.  That was until I had the Chicken and Spinach Manicotti.  This is in my Top 10 dishes ever.  That very night after eating this dish, I kid you not, I had a dream about it.  Yes, when I have a great meal, I will dream about it.  I still get this dish 99% of the time.  Every time I get it, it makes my whole day.  If I could get away with it in public, I would totally lick the plate to get all of the sauce off because I don't want to waste one drop of that awesome Alfredo goodness.  When I do try a different dish, I often feel like I am having a food affair and cheating on my precious manicotti Yes, I love it that much.  I have tried a few other dishes (while having a food affair) and they have all been good.  I really have enjoyed the Chicken Saltimbocca, Eggplant Parm, Lasagna, and the Beef Tenderloin Medallions.  I don't think I have ever heard anyone I was with not like one of their dishes.  Yummy yum.  The kid's menu is also fantastic as well.  The food is awesome adult quality except it is just a little more friendly to a kid palates.  They have all sorts of pasta options, chicken fingers, and pizza.  The kid's chicken fingers are ridiculously tasty because yes, I steal my kid's food on occasion.  Every kid's meal is $5.95 for a big entree, dessert, and a drink.  This is a better deal than a lot of restaurants that serve kid's mediocre food.  I love a good deal!  One good tip I have for you is to make a reservation ahead of time.  This particular location always seems to be busy, no matter what time of day.  They are on OpenTable.com, so making a reservation is super easy 24/7.    If you have never been to a Maggiano's, you should give it a try.  And of course my recommendation would be the Chicken and Spinach Manicotti!"							
371Q3BEXDHPVXUDLBCY7IGYQ5A9ZSD	"Made a reservation here and was seated with no problem; but then again there was no wait. Service was pretty good, my girlfriend and I came as a short last dinner before heading back to reality. I would give our server a solid B+/A- considering menu explanation, time it took to get his attention, he remembered my to-go order, and we spent less than an hour there from being sat to exiting.  We had: -Side spinach salad with gorgonzola cheese: pretty yummy, I am a fan of gorgonzola but I think huge chunks were a little much, even for me. Dressing was a little heavy. -Linguine & Clam: good broth in the pasta, healthy amount of clams -Peppercorn steak w/ the Maggiano's sauce which was carmelized onion and such: so yummy; a bit salty so you have to eat it with the mashed potatoes but the potatoes had melted cheese and it was so so good.  Do want to mention that this restaurant did not have the classic ""buy one take one home"" menu options that are available at a lot of other chains, though."							
34R3P23QHSH2DQU0PV21FYX6FXOHWK	"Made a Reservation here Saturday night to celebrate my birthday dinner after hearing great things about the food. Reservation was for 8:45pm and we got there at 8:30pm. Waited for about 45 minutes until going inside to ask the hostess how much longer. We also asked ""what was the point of making the reservation if we had to wait for so long anyways?"" the supervisor said that ""If we didn't like it, then we could call and complain about it."" So after no apology or the supervisor even offering to check on the table for us, we left very unhappy. Ended up going to a Mexican place next to it where we were seated immediately and the food was delicious and the service was great."							
3IZPORCT1FPX5UDEQ1SVSZPPNI9HRH	Made a special reservation for my son's 21st birthday party.  The entire family flew to Las Vegas for this event. We have some food allergies and I spoke with the manager upon making reservations that our party of 10 could not order family style.  I was told that they would make an exception and let us order Al a Carte and that he would be sure to note it in the reservation. When we arrived they refused and said that they were too busy to accommodate us.   We ended up having to leave and went over to Don Vito's at South Point Hotel and had a delicious dinner that everyone could eat and thoroughly enjoy. Five Stars to the food and Service at Don Vito's!							
3T6EIBTM9L4QWQJJIKWHGNDBAJUAAQ	"Maggiano's - Its Happy Hour is NO LONGER AS GOOD AS BEFORE (now 3Stars on my book), although still a great 4-Star restaurant for dinner.  YELPY DETAILS: - This nice mid-scale restaurant is conveniently located on the strip nearby the lively fashion mall district. It used to be my favorite spot for HH on the strip. It has an inviting bar area with a classy bar counter and several bar tables around, with a good selection of drinks and excellent service. But my wife and I just had an unsatifying HH experience there recently.  - One early Fri evening inmid-August, mywife and I came here for happy hour again and were disappointed that: (1) They NOT ONLY took away our favorite ""Fried Zucchinis"" from the Happy Hour Food Menu, (2) BUT ALSO, the entire bar menu now contained a grand total of ONLY ONE ITEM, i.e., Flatbread! Luckily the flatbread was delicious. - Well, my wife and I used to bring our out-of-town guests here for happy hour and dinner. The place was almost always very crowded with happy customers in the PAST, especially during its happy hour. But, on this Fri evening (around 5:30pm),the bar area was PRACTICALLY EMPTY, with only 2 tables occupied and only ONE customer at the bar counter! We thought it could have a lot to do with the now VERY LIMITED HAPPY HOUR MENU, our nice and efficient waitress agreed. - Well, one more good point: We were nevertheless pleased that they still give out their best tasting warm bread FREE, which tasted heavenly especially dipped in olive oil/basamic vinegar!  BOTTOM LINE for HH: - Due to the diminished value and the ""Empty-Space-Atmosphere"" (on a Fri evening at that!), I'd now give it only 3 Stars for HH.  On the other hand, to be fair, just back in March, we brought friends over there for dinner (NOT HH), we did have a fabulous time, with tasty dishes, drinks and superb service! So, we wish that Maggiano Management would do something to bring back their popular HH menu and fill its place again for HH! - Hints: Please put back ""Fried Zucchinis"", and perhaps even add ""Crab Cakes"" to its Bar Menu, which is a GREAT HIT on Schottsdale Maggiano's HH Menu anyway! - Until then, I could still go there for a good dinner, but will not likely go back there just for happy hour.  Peterskis, August 2012"							
3SBNLSTU6ULPV5U3EM3INHCQ47YZDI	"Maggiano's is a good choice.  This one is located in the Fashion Show mall pretty much across the street from the the Wynn.  Even though it's an outpost of a chain, they do a pretty good job with the food.  The veal Marsala was a generous portion and was excellently prepared.  Pastas were really good and filling.  Service was friendly and competent.  The restaurant was buzzing and filled with diners, which is always a good indicator.  A meal here will cost you much less than at a budget buster celebrity chef restaurant and the experience will be almost as good.  I'm looking forward to going back."							
3W5PY7V3UPN2T1KQSWNAC8Y13XSJYQ	Maggiano's is a good place! The service is great. The food is appetizing. My boyfriend and I enjoy sitting in the outside area with the strip view.  We always have a few cocktails and share some good food.... and people watch! Great place to spend an afternoon!							
388CL5C1RJ3M2WI1LHVZ6NGQHQJLHU	"Maggiano's is a nice place to go to when guest are in town. It is a step above Olive Garden, but not as costly as Rao's. There is always a line, so that is a good sign that they are doing something right.  It has been more than two years since I have been able to get back to this Italian restaurant. I wanted to see if it is as good as I remembered. When a friend came into town, it was the perfect opportunity to visit. The wait was estimated for 30-45 minutes, so we grabbed a drink at the bar. They make a skinny sangria that tastes like fruit punch. It is lethal and easy to knock back. My friend ordered the frozen peach bellini and it tasted like a smoothie. Most of the drinks cost around 8-10 dollars. Not bad for being on the strip.  When we were sat, the server promptly greeted us and filled our water glasses. The service was impeccable. She was friendly, attentive, and non intrusive.   We had ordered the calamari appetizer to give us some time to decide on our entree. Apparently it took some time to come out, but we did not notice. Caught up in our conversation and snacking on the bread made time go by quickly.   Our waitress gave some great suggestions and I decided on a dish that would help the Make-a-Wish foundation. Right now, they have a few specialty items that Maggiano's will donate a portion of the proceeds to the charity. The roasted chicken farfalle is delicious. The bow tie pasta was cooked al dente, the chicken moist, generous amounts of spinach, sun dried tomatoes, asparagus, topped with parm slivers. The broth like sauce at the bottom made the dish light. I was happy that I could get something that was not cream based and not have to settle for marinara. My friend had ordered the chicken pesto pasta and it was good. You must love basil and pesto to get this meal because it is bold. I would order it again.   Overall this was a nice meal. I would not hesitate to go back, but next time I will skimp on the bread to save some room for dessert."							
38O9DZ0A62304LCCFSMQU0SR2CD26M	Maggiano's is a very nice restaurant. The service was excellent. The food was very appetizing. There's plenty to eat when you order a family style meal with a party of 4 or more. Will come back again. I recommend this place to everyone visiting the Las Vegas strip.							
360ZO6N6J1ZDT8I3NH8MTJXRYI2M98	"Maggiano's is both my husband and my favorite Italian restaurant to eat at.  It is amazing!  Fresh, flavorful, good portion size, reasonable prices and a fantastic atmosphere (dim, energetic, but not overly loud).  We LOVE, LOVE, LOVE it!  Staff is awesome.  Only downfall is without a reservation, you will have a wait (sometimes even with one)."							
3PKJ68EHDNCG76U1IWJMQ83YD1FHJP	Maggiano's is consistently above average and this outpost in the Fashion Show Mall is no exception. The waitstaff was very attentive. We were also able to take advantage of their buy one pasta dish take one home offer. What a great value!  Thanks FourSquare :)							
3GV1I4SEO95657YKPY4V9WR08C3L6T	"Maggiano's is conveniently located in the Fashion Show mall below The Capital Grille.  It was my first time here and the food was better than I had expected.  I went with my beautiful girlfriend for lunch.  She had signed up for their mailing list and received a coupon good for $10.00 off our total meal.  The server was really nice and she even gave us her card at the end of the meal (after she had learned that we were locals).  We ordered Chicken Fetuccini Alfredo, Baked Ziti, and the Fried Zuchinni as an appetizer.  We were about to order more than the Fried Zuchinni for an appetizer, but I'm glad we didn't.  They turned out to be Zuchinni Spears (6) and they were huge! The breading on the Zuchinni was to die for!  It was cooked to perfection. I wonder if they used Panko to bread it?  I highly recommend it.  The Ziti was not that impressive at all.  It was way too meaty and sauce was bland in taste.  My Alfredo was good and rich in taste.  I had no complaints about the service (they even were able to give us a window seat when we asked...no reservation made).  We had a good view of the strip and Wynn casino.  I'd definitely come here again.  I would have scored them 5 star, but the Ziti knocked 'em down.  Next time, I want to try their Calamari!"							
3TD33TP5DLIVF0OBOYWDBYXHS1FABL	"Maggiano's is delicious Italian food at prices that won't break the bank. It's a nice atmosphere without being pretentious. The fried zucchini is delicious (they used to have asparagus that was even better), the family style menu is awesome, and the desserts are to die for. They also have a great happy hour M-F 4-6:30 & Sun-Th. 8:45-10:45 with discounted drinks and app's. Tonight I had Baked Ziti, and it was perfect!"							
3ZURAPD2883PYTNRXHPGJNVZ351F1K	Maggiano's is must go and enjoy great ambiance. The service was attentive and the food was delicious!							
3QREJ3J433DD4MJ9R2YWJFWI97NLKY	"Maggiano's is one of several restaurants in the fashion show mall. Definitely better than venturing into the food court if you have the time.   Went here on a Saturday evening they were busy still, my waitress was prompt and courteous. The outdoor patio is wonderful option. The food is yummy with great menu options."							
3NFWQRSHVEUM28DUF0AJQAZ55ULFGL	"Maggiano's is well umm I guess just another chain restaurant in the Brinker International group alongside Chili's. The food here always tastes good though and it's way more nice than a Chili's (trust me...I used to work at a Chili's T_T). I really enjoyed the violinist that walked around the room playing guests favorite song. I share the shrimp scampi and it was okay. Nothing too stunning or extraordinary in my senses.  Good service, clean tables, tidy restrooms and prompt service."							
33W1NHWFYH1WCUQ00C3XSLUC7TNZT2	"MAGGIANO'S LITTLE ITALY ... EPIC FAIL LAST NIGHT!   OK, so last night (10/2/13) we returned to Maggiano's Little Italy restaurant in the Fashion Show Center, on the Vegas strip, expecting our usual fine dining experience.  But things went badly awry.    Here's how our evening went: * 5:00 -  check in and immediately get seated in a nice booth with a view of the Strip.  So far, so good. * 5:15 -  finally get some water.  Hmmm. * 5:25 -  finally asked what we wanted to drink.  As we already had plenty of time to ponder, we immediately gave our entire order. * 5:40 -  bread and olive oil arrive. * 5:55 -  bruschetta and salad finally arrive.  Really, 30 minutes for bruschetta and a house salad? * 6:25 -  entres finally arrive.  No special requests, mind you, just the house special.  WTH! * 6:35 -  we ask for our bill and some take-home containers, so we can head out to our show. * 6:50 -  we sign our bill and head out, thank heavens.  How about the food?  Salad dressing contained some new, hotter peppers than previously.  Wife took a few bites and quit.  Bruschetta was good.  Entres were very disappointing.  We had our usual Rigatoni ""D"", a house specialty, which is usually excellent.  Not so, last night.  The sauce was so watered down that it wouldn't adhere to any of the rigatoni, mushrooms or chicken.  We had to dunk our bread into it to get any, or it just dripped off like water.    My wife plans to ""doctor"" the sauce a bit to make it workable, and we'll try the leftovers tonight.  Hope she can fix it.  Last night Maggiano's failed badly.  Never had that happen at Gaetano's ... ever.  Guess where we're going from now on.  Dean Herrington"							
3W1K7D6QSBXWG8WJ0QCCSROQ1MMZBB	"Maggiano's Little Italy is on the second floor of the Fashion Show Mall, across from the Wynn and Treasure Island on Las Vegas Blvd.   Maggiano's is a chain restaurant that can be found in over 20 states. I have eaten at the one in Minneapolis as well as this one. I guess in the hiearchy of Italian food Chain restaurants it goes something like this:  Out of the can and not Italian: Chef Boyardee Slightly better Casual not Italian: Olive Garden and Macaroni Grill A little better if you didn't know better: Pasta Pomodoro  Mid-level trying to fool you as high-end Italian: Maggiano's and Buca de Beppo Higher prices and more Northern Italian: Il Forniao Really great Italian: don't tend to be chain restaurants   Maggiano's has nice ambiance, expensive dark wood decor, and is usually very popular and crowded. In Vegas expect to wait even with a reservation. We had a party of 10, called at 5 and couldn't get reservation until 8:30. Maggiano's is perfect for large parties, as they offer huge dishes that are meant to be shared (most have a half size option, so take it!) They offer a family style approach special menu for large groups, where the cost is $29.95 per person, and includes 2 shared appetizers, 2 pastas, and 2 mains in a bottomless approach. They encourage this, as they will tell you if you order a la carte, it may take 30 - 45 minutes (for Pasta?). we went a la carte because some didn;t want to comprimise into limited selections.   The Mozzarella Buffula appetizer (what they called Tomato Slice and Mozzarella, or something like that) is one of my favorite Italian appetizers. The special goat mozzarella with a basil leaf over a tomato slice is a nice combination, Maggiano's shreds the basil, which I prefer the fresh whole leaf. You get 3 slices with an order.   The Capellini d'arrabiata (which they call by the English name of Angel Hair) comes in a huge bowl with about 1/2 to 1 pound of pasta, roma tomatoes, garlic and a little oil, with some basil, and a slightly spicey arrabiata sauce. They have a couple of lasagna offerings, either covered in a bolognese (ground beef) sauce or in a Marinara. It is huge, like everything is. There is a large menu of good selections for most people.   They don't offer olive oil and balsamic vinegar with your bread, but if you ask for it, they will bring it to you.   If you want A LOT of food and willing to pay over $30 per person for Pasta, go here."							
3V7ICJJAZAWGDB8UFXMMYVBH0RK4B5	"Maggiano's never disappoints!  From their soft, yet crusty bread to their house salad with unbelievable dressing, just the first part of the meal is incredible!  I highly recommend the lobster carbonara!  It has tons of chunks of lobster, so it's definitely worth the price!    We made reservations at 8 and, while they were unable to seat us any earlier than 8, they were very prompt in getting us a table shortly thereafter.    The service was great and the view of the Wynn was awesome!  Whether you're in Vegas or any other city that offers Maggiano's, I highly recommend this place!!"							
3OKP4QVBP2DR6HWM4KORC9OE8E7AG2	Maggianos has a great dinner time environment. We sat by the windows facing the strip and it was really beautiful to have the dark dining room looking out towards the bright LV strip.   The food was excellent and exactly what it should be at this price point. The food is not homemade but I think that's pretty apparent by the fact that it is in a Mall. It is however made to order and above the quality of most other chain restaurants.  Tiramisu here was the best I have ever had. I am still pretty new to tiramisu as I have only had it about five times but wow is it really good here. I will probably stop in just for the tiramisu every time I go shopping at fashion show. Make sure and try it.							
3XH7ZM9YX2A4QOVVSP43FIR1451R91	"Maggianos is a family atmosphere restaurant, with a good location, great food and excellent service. If you're looking for that restaurant where you want to fell comfortable with the whole family this is it, I come here every time I'm visiting Vegas with my four years old daughter (of course she knows how to behave in a restaurant).  The location is perfect, specially if you're planning to do some shopping since is located right there at the fashion show mall and if you're  lucky you might get a table with a nice view of the Wynn and Encore casinos across the strip. The food is great,  some of my favorites entrees are the Lobster Carbonara, the Rigatoni D and the Chicken Manicotti, all good and  the portion of food is more than enough. The excellent service is based on my last visit. I made a 7:15pm reservation but we arrived about 20 minutes earlier (Vegas traffic unpredictable). I asked them if we could be  seated and in less than five minutes we were already enjoying ourselves. Nestor was the name of the waiter, he was there when needed with suggestions of appetizers, wine and desserts. Simply GREAT SERVICE!!"							
307FVKVSYRVTBZ542GA6TTPLH1T74M	Make a reservation if you are eating here before attending a show on a Friday night. Waiting time can be anywhere from 30 to 90 mins.							
3VP28W7DUN0MTP8Z5SY8BHFBGKEFZ9	"Met some friends for dinner Sat night. It was totally empty in here for a Saturday evening but the friends we dined with have eaten here before and had good things to say.  I ordered a glass of wine and my husband tried a spicy jalapeno margarita mixed drink. Not bad. The chips and salsa they bring to the table include three salsas (one is a more a traditional salsa, one is a bean dip, and the other more of a creamy verde sauce). Our server told us the fish tacos appetizer was excellent so we ordered those. I ordered the shrimp diablo and my husband ordered the seafood stew in a creamy sauce.  The fish tacos were just ok. They weren't ""excellent"", I've had far better fish tacos, although I did like the mango-jalapeno salsa that came on the side. My entree was VERY spicy, fitting with the name and came with black beans and I decided to try the lemon-cilantro rice which was pretty good. I don't think it was worth $24 though. Highly overpriced for such a simple meal of a few shrimp with rice and beans.   My husbands meal tasted good, but he said it was more reminiscent of Italian flavors, and nothing really Mexican about it other than his sides of black beans and Spanish rice. One of our friends ordered a pasta dish with a cream sauce he loved previously, and was disappointed when it came out with spaghetti style pasta vs the linguine he'd had before.  Although our server was friendly, she was scarce. We waited and waited, even for our drinks. After she took our drink order she apologized for the wait as she said the bartender was MIA all of a sudden.  Even our friends who had better experiences here said this evening was lackluster at best. I just think it was also overpriced for what it was.  As a side note, I was expecting a huge tequila menu and was excited to try a few, but their drink menu just included wines and specialty mixed drinks. I'm sure they have tequila at the bar, but I guess I was expecting it to be featured more."							
3V7ICJJAZAWGDB8UFXMMYVBH0RKB4C	"Mika's was great! Not only the food was great and very reasonable, staff is friendly and knowledgable about everything on the menu. The owner is right there in the front  talking to the customers, I will definately be back!"							
3OREP8RUT2RWPR1EAYON7K8KQWTBGZ	"Most UNAUTHENTIC spanish restaurant I've ever been to.  Stopped in for a drink and tapas and left after the drink.  The whole ambiance just isn't there. Based on other reviews, I'm pretty sure I didn't miss out on a whole lot."							
3VGET1QSZ0F5K1OOCMGPOL8C1URW7W	"Much better experience than the Santana Row, San Jose, CA location. The servers, staff, food were excellent.  Everyone was polite. The location was much nicer and more central to the strip. We had a great time. We had a nice family dinner and enjoyed every aspect."							
344M16OZKIV06MUK7T38YCN2U5RNEI	"My all time favorite Italian restaurant!  A must have is Rigatoni D.  A few other recommendations are four cheese ravioli, beef medallions and the spinach and artichoke dip.  Beautiful restaurant and very busy.  Make reservations on a weekend."							
3B6F54KMR2SY2YSD31PFQMEESVW1SQ	"My boyfriend suggested this place as an option for lunch because I wanted to eat some type of noodle on our bday (for long life) and I've been craving Italian. Of course I made a reservation on OpenTable, went to the website, checked out the menu, signed up for the email list, and received a $10 off coupon right away!  It's kind of nice because when you sign up they give you a $10 off coupon and when you submit more info on your profile for them they give you another coupon for a free dessert! I stuck with the $10 coupon though since I had more than enough birthday cake already.   Our reservation was at 12:30pm. We came in and all the booths with views were taken, but they were able to give us one of their 2 seater tables right next to the window, so that was nice. We got our water and complimentary bread right away and the waitress came over to give us some suggestions on appetizers. She suggested the bruschetta, but we ended up ordering fried zucchini.   After looking over the menu we decided to order fettuccine w/ chicken and baked ziti. I've never ordered baked ziti from a restaurant, it's always been at little food courts in shopping malls, so I was hoping for something pretty delicious.    The zucchini arrived and boy were they huge! My boyfriend and I both looked at the zucchini, then at each other and said at the same time, ""wow, those are zucchini spears!"" There was about 6 of them so we got three each. It was pretty tasty. The breading was light and the lemon aioli went perfectly with it. It was a little too big for two though, especially since you get the complimentary bread; I was only able to finish a spear and a half.   Our food came and it looked delicious. I almost dove right in without taking pictures! I took a bite of my ziti, and I was a little disappointed. It just tasted very salty and not at all like I expected. Maybe I'm just so used to the ziti at the mall (which I love!) that I'm not used to authentic style ziti? I tried my boyfriend's fettuccine shortly after and that dish was heavenly! I'm really happy he let me take the leftovers home!  I really didn't eat much of my ziti at all, especially after trying the fettuccine. I think I just ordered the wrong dish, I'm sure their other dishes are yummy.  We asked for a togo box and gave the waitress the coupon. She came back with an aluminum container with a cardboard top and a little baggy of fresh bread.   I think our bill only came up to about $25 dollars because of the coupon, so that was definitely a nicely priced lunch!  Overall the food was delicious, except for the ziti. The service was quick and courteous. The  view was beautiful. 4 stars and I'd love to come back to try their dessert!"							
3YOAVL4CA0XCV9BALB2PKDIKRU5Z45	"My boyfriend took me here for our one year anniversary and it was such a perfect place for a romantic dinner. He made reservations for two and when we got there, the table was ready and they were waiting for us! They had us sat at such a beautiful spot next to the window in front of the Wynn Hotel (which is always a sight to see!)   We were immediately treated with bread and balsamic vinegar which was very good! The bread was warm and soft and they kept coming with them! And the balsamic vinegar was also so tasty! We ordered our food and did not wait more then 20/ 25 mins. But we enjoyed it because they had a man walking around playing the violin very beautifuly. We loved it. When we got our dinner it was very delicious and the portions were great! The price was also very reasonable for a restaurant on the strip! They had $14 plate all the way up to $25 dishes. But they had all the Italian classics and many seafood dishes (which was what my boyfriend had, and said it was great!)  I highly recomend this restaurant for people who need a good warm meal in a great, soothing atmosphere!   The only reason why I gave Maggiano's Little Italy 3 stars was because towards the end of our meal the waiter was standing (not very far from our table) staring us down, waiting for us to finish up and leave. I found it a little rude and uncomfortable, but other then those last 10 mins it was a great experience."							
3XDSWAMB2286CLNYRUPUCII4E41QCF	"My brother and I went there when we were in Las Vegas and the food was very delicious. The belinis were out of this world.  The manager came to check up on us at the table to see if we were being taken care of. This was, of course, during a commercial. He was watching the game on the TV screens and couldn't be bothered during the game and kindly waited for a commercial.  After lunch, the manager and the waitstaff were congregated in the front of the reception area as we were about to leave and my brother and I both felt we were breaking up coffee talk.  Other than that, the experience was great as well as the food."							
3X7837UUADE0AHAKMDSITHE84NZ6JD	"My buddies and I decided to eat here while all of us suffered from hangovers.  The delicious food here will restore your apetite from whatever came back out from the previous night.  The family style is a great way to enjoy the meal.  They provide a lot of food for their prices.  We started with the potato soup which relly jump started my apetite.  It's rich, creamy, and flavorful.  Next up was the Beef Braciole.  This dish was quite interesting.  The texture was weird yet it was edible (may have been my hangover dulling my senses).  I can't quite remember the name of the next dish, but it was a spicy spaghetti and meat balls, I believe.  The spiciness brought back all my senses and pretty much kicked me out of my intoxicated state.  You can never go wrong with spaghetti and meatballs.  We also had the Rigatoni ""D"".  The chicken was tender and the protein gave me energy for more partying.    They gave us enough food to take back to the hotel and have for dinner.  If you love Italian food and pastas, this place would be a place to stop by."							
31J7RYECZL6BYLXNJSSEE00J01O1LC	"My co worker and I were driving around Phoenix looking for an Ihop and stumbled upon First Watch.  Good thing we did because it was well worth the breakfast stop considering their reasonable prices, good variety, free pitcher of coffee at our table, and very friendly service.  I had something called a Crepegg which is a thin sweet crepe combined with fluffy whipped eggs.  It kind of tastes like an omelet but not really since it has the crepe batter in it.  But my Key West Crepe was very satisfying with avocado, bacon, smoked turkey, tomatoes, and monterey jack cheese.  I did also want to try the banana crunch with granola pancake but you can only eat so much in one sitting!!!"							
30ZKOOGW2WMU226JM13O5MK86PP1AU	"My co-workers and I have made our rounds to quite a few T.G.I. Fridays. The TGIF at the Orleans Hotel and Casino on Tropicana Avenue is our favorite. We usually sit at the bar for happy hour -- the food and drinks are inexpensive and the bartenders are quite conversational and very friendly.   TGIF is generally a relaxed, fun atmosphere. The restaurant is clean and tidy, the service is great... We always have a good time! If you are in the mood to kick back with a few friends and grab some delicious snacks, then I would recommend the TGIF at the Orleans."							
3TL87MO8CM52O0RVQR7Z324D1B6FLQ	My cousin took me here...delicious! Get the dumplings- amazing!							
3PN6H8C9R46OUXMV2UNJ6OLHVMSADT	My family & I went to Maggiano's to celebrate my daughter's & nephew's 13th birthday. It was crowded but we were seated within 10 minutes. Our server was very prompt and informative. I ordered a bottle of Chianti and the price was very reasonable. I had the Shrimp and Crab Cannoli and it was soo delicious. Everything we ordered was great & we will definitely be back!							
3UV0D2KX1MZ6QSKAKZ8IHL22FPCF4Y	My family and a friend met up at Maggiano's in Fashion Show and I'm experiencing mixed feelings about it.   Locations: Great place to meet but mall closes before the restaurant. It makes the underground parking difficult to access. Consider using the valet.   Service: Our server was very nice but she also presented the olive oil/balsamic vinegar plate in front of my four year old. It was a very messy spill.   Food: Pretty good overall. The fried zucchini appetizer is always good. My friends chicken salad looked fine and my pepperoni flat bread was not interesting in the slightest.   Summary: I'll go back if encouraged but great Italian food is easy to come by in Las Vegas. I'm not rushing back.							
3MWOYZD5WV4MID7917643OHGY7XNOM	"My family's favorite!  Can't say enough about the service, everyone including the owners are so gracious, friendly and fast.  Every time we visit, we feel like family.  The food is AMAZING!  I'm very picky when it comes to mexican food and Caldero is Tops!  The portions are more than what you would expect and are beautifully presented.  My partner and I especially love the happy hour specials, the barbacoa street tacos are to die for.    If you love true authentic mexican food at a great price you must visit Caldero - you will NOT be disapointed."							
3TL87MO8CM52O0RVQR7Z324D1B7FLR	"my first time at maggianos overall..and it did not disappoint.  had such a great window seat, where you could see wynn and people busying around down below, since the maggiano's was in the 2nd floor of the building.   i think this particular location would be great for lunch, or anytime the sun is out because the sun shines through the big open windows. ordered 4 big pasta dishes (to share with four other people of course, but i would be down to eat all that), have to rave about the Rigatoni'D!! the sauce...made it what it is. a pesto, white creamy sauce sooo good, i definitely recommend it to everybody.  our waiter, i forget the name, was awesome..he had this cool accent and was so nice and helpful. the calamari was OK but ..the cheesecake was pretty good."							
3W1K7D6QSBXWG8WJ0QCCSROQ1MNBZO	"My first time dining at Maggiano's was in Florida a couple years ago. I fell in love with it! I came back home, to Vegas, and was unaware we had one here until I went to the Fashion Show Mall. They never cease to amaze me. From their freshly baked bread that's still hot when brought to your table, to their absolutely delicious 4 Cheese Ravioli, you can't go wrong dining here. Our waitress was this super sweet lady who was obviously from a different country. I can't remember her name, but she was the best. Couldn't ask for a better server. The hostess was a bit... Off setting. She didn't look very happy. But I've been a hostess before and I know how stressful it can be. A smile will go a long way though (:"							
3W5PY7V3UPN2T1KQSWNAC8Y13XRYJ4	"My friend and I ended up here by accident but I'm glad we stopped by!  Service is very attentive here, and we were quickly seated.  We ordered the cheese crab puffs and the potstickers.  I'd pass on the cheese puffs, they had a bizarre flavor, that I still can't put my finger on.  The pot stickers were perfect.  I ordered the pepper beef and it was very good.  The red and green peppers were cooked just perfectly so they were not too soft or crisp and the beef was also done just right with the perfect amount of pepper sauce.  It came with white rice, which I'm not use to, since I usually have brown, but that was fine also.  Decor is fine, a little 60's china-ish but it seems to suit the place.  From the diverse crowd that was there last night enjoying themselves, it seems they agree with me.  This place is a hit."							
30F94FBDNR00UWNKUYNU63N9GQ0TBP	"My friends and I were tired and hungry from walking and just decided to go in here and I'm pretty glad we did. We got seated by the window so we had a  pretty nice view of the strip. The food was good, I ordered the  steak and it was really tender and well flavored. What I didnt like was that our waitress disappeared most of the time and was no where to be seen and also my drink Manhattan, it was a little too strong for me and not like what the waitress described it to be refreshing and sweet."							
3KQC8JMJGC85MSSCFBRZA1M9H4T3HZ	"My go to lunch and dinner spot near home! I have been here about 5 or 6 times now and have figured out the best things to order:  -beef tenderloin with chimichurri sauce  -asparagus with romesco sauce -Spanish chicken wings  Go on Monday for half price tapas! Skip the drinks unless it's happy hour, though.   Finish your meal with the lava cake. It's to die for!"							
3CVBMEMMXBWNNBTZHNUPNIYPM6FH7I	"My go-to place when I want plenty of breakfast options & 0-little waiting time to be seated. No matter how full it looks like it is, I've only had to wait to be seated once & that took all of 5 minutes.   This is a breakfast & lunch restaurant & is not open for diner. I must confess, no matter what time I've been, I always have breakfast, so that's all I can review :D My favorite omelet is new on their menu, the Ce La Vie. It's  roasted zucchini, onions and tomatoes with herbed goat cheese. It comes with just the right amount of potatoes and an english muffin. I always switch out the muffin for wheat toast.  When I'm ravenous & I want something a little heavier, I like the bacon and onion hash.    The staff is always so friendly & our waitress always remembers us, even when she's not our waitress :)"							
3R868ACW4SSS7P4UGC4QT2FNHZFGZA	"My hubby and I go out for Happy Hour once a month on Fridays. I get off work early and we head to a new place by 4:30 or so. Having read a few positive reviews and since this place is pretty close to our home, we thought why not.  The weather was in the high 70's today and nothing is as good as a cool crisp sangria on a warm spring day.  Of course the sangria has to have some flavor, which this one did not   Our server was good and very attentive.  The place was pretty empty but it was 4:30 so it was to be expected. We asked our server for some recommendations and ordered the bacon wrapped dates, the scallops, the sliders, some shrimp and the peppers. Everything was just ok. The dates were not as good as Fireflys and we only received 3 of them. The scallops had a sauce made with cinnamon that was a little off putting and the shrimp were way over cooked and had zero flavor. I couldn't talk my husband into eating the last slider either.   Our bill was $60 which is pretty expensive considering how small all the portions were, it was also supposed to be happy hour but they only discount their Tapas 20% off the regular price.   All in all not a place we'd return to again Next time I'm in the mood for sangria I'm heading back to Firefly."							
3ABAOCJ4R8KJL7ZP4JJ8FENG8I5QMX	"My hubby took me here for dinner. There was a 45 min wait but well worth it. Nice place, turned out to be very romantic. We had a small table right but the window of the strip. We had someone play a violin for us. The service was great and the food was OUT OF THIS WORLD. Don't come to vegas and miss a meal here.   Visited September 2011"							
301KG0KX9C1G1AWTBBDURRHHBQTH22	"My husband and another friend went for an early dinner on a Sunday. We were there by 5pm and the place was already hopping! When you order the dinner for 2+, you get a delicious chilled chicken salad, a choice of soup & some of the best crab puffs in town. My friend and I enjoyed the Chicken w/ Snow Peas & Walnut Shrimp. No complaints! Hot, fresh and plenty to take home for lunch at work the next day. My husband enjoyed the Sweet & Sour Chicken. Big pieces of moist, white chicken. We drove from 1-17 and the Carefree Hwy to check this place out. Well worth the trip!"							
3GONHBMNHVESZZ0GRF2L67ZKDLQMZN	My husband and I ate here the last night of our Vegas vacation. The atmosphere was wonderful. The food...out of this world.  I couldn't believe how reasonable the prices were. We would have paid similar to our local Olive Garden only way better and would have had to wait an hour to get a table. I would highly recommend Maggianos.  Our waitress asked if we were having a special occasion and we told her we celebrated our 30th wedding anniversary and she brought us out complimentary dessert with lit candles.							
38LRF35D5LCAREYWFAYYTGBZBCVU3R	"My husband and I came here for lunch and the wait was pretty long so we opted to sit at the bar.  The service was ok, it seemed the waitress was trying hard to get the food out, but it being the bar it wasn't as fast as it usually is.   I ordered the 4-cheese ravioli, and I LOVE cheese ravioli at restaurants...and I get it, its supposed to taste like cheese but this ravioli was so overwhelmingly cheesy that you couldn't really taste the sauce or anything else! My husband ordered the baked ziti and while it was good, we've had better.  The bread basket was cold and hard but the next basket was a little warmer.   The drinks were mixed here mine was pure vodka (but its Vegas right?..I can't complain!) but my husbands was a little watered down.   All in all it was an ok place, but there is better Italian food to be had."							
3Z33IC0JC02WJVCC199DGFG4PBE9VC	"My husband and I came here for my 25th birthday dinner and let me just tell you, our waiter Anthony made our experience absolutely exceptional. He made conversation like we had known each other for years! We wanted to hug him on our way out the door! My husband and I have traveled a lot and it was the best service we have had ANYWHERE. The food was delectable. I had the lobster carbonara and my husband had the seafood pasta. His dish was piled high with seafood. Usually you only get a couple of each type of seafood but he literally had a plate full. I got a free birthday tiramisu and Anthony also brought me cute little lemon cookies with candles on them! An all around a Wonderful experience!"							
3SZYX62S5GGB7I94GLTGYLVZHXO75R	"My husband and I dined here during our honeymoon in Vegas. We shared a portion of salad, liguine with clams and a couple of glasses of wine. The food tasted great! We made a reservation before we arrived, which recommend for a Friday night in Vegas. The server was nice and attentive so our experience here was positive. I would come here again."							
3ULIZ0H1VALXWWU2R5C7XB4MEBO15O	My husband and I had a Groupon for this restaurant and decided to give it a try since we were new to the Vegas area.   We were sorely disappointed when everything we ordered was significantly lacking in flavor. I don't even think salt was used on any of the dishes. Tapas are supposed to be packed with taste-bud tickling flavors and that is definitely not what we received.  I will continue to go to Firefly on Sahara instead.							
36JW4WBR06002485Z6S1BAB6KUYHFM	My husband and I had our wedding dinner here with a small group of guests (13 total). We did a family style dinner which I was allowed to order before we arrived so everything would be brought out without waiting a long time. The food was delicious! We had a lot of food left over for lunch the next day.....it tasted even better! Our waiter was fabulous as well as very friendly. Family style is definitely the way to go if you have a big group and are on a tight budget.  Thank you everyone at Maggiano's!!							
391FPZIE4C2PLM5VUVN0XAC9UHDHUL	"My husband and I had our wedding reception here and thought it would be special torevisit it for our 6 month anniversary since our original impression was spectacular. Unfortunately our experience for our anniversary was the complete opposite.  Even though we made reservations our table was on top of the guests behind us. The service was virtually nonexistent;  we had empty glasses, we waited about 30 minutes for each course,  and when  finally got our food it was not as satisfying as our original experience.  Needless to say, we will not be dining with them again."							
3Q7TKIAPOTQ5QGDZZLC9F21SPYQLDL	"My husband and I love to take the family to Maggiano's when we're in Las Vegas.  The food is amazing but be sure to bring your appetite!  It's family style so it's obviously huge but the portions here seem to be exceptionally large - even for family style. The stuffed mushroom appetizer, the caesar salads and the linguine/clams in red sauce are my recommendations. The service at this restaurant is amazing, as well. My drink was never  empty, they timed each course perfectly so that I was never with too little or too much food at my table and my leftovers were whisked away and returned in cute little brown packages before I had time to even notice they were gone.  Great experience!  The restaurant is, also, on a great part of the strip so you can walk off all the food you just ate while taking in the sights."							
3PZDSVZ3J5XIEKXRINRVPQBBHGXN4C	"My husband and I ordered the Jack Daniel's steak & shrimp and the potstickers as an appetizer. As we were at our table I saw the bartender water down a couple of drinks (belonging to someone else) when they didn't quite make it to the rim. Immediately turned around and saw in big letters on the wall ""Ultimate Cocktails."" I couldn't help but laugh. I'm SO not a drinker so I don't even know if this is normal! Maybe a fellow yelper can clue me in? Anyway, potstickers were great as was the Ultimate Strawberry Shortcake we ordered for dessert. The steak was quite dry, the shrimp way too crunchy and the squash/zucchini was soggy. The Jack Daniel's sauce, mashed potatoes and broccoli were good though."							
3QO7EE372O3N2GVSDUTZ1YCMWJ2BQU	"My husband and I stopped in for an early weekend lunch recently. We had the entire place to ourselves for a bit around 11:30. It's attached to the Fashion Show Mall, and it seemed like most were just grabbing a quick bite in the food court instead.   I liked the fact that our server asked if we preferred butter or olive oil and parmesan to go along with our bread. Gimme' the oil and parm, please! A pet peeve of mine is that a few select Italian restaurants in St. Louis want to up-charge for this... yes, seriously. Anywho, we carbed out on the stuff. :)  I ordered the chicken and spinach cannelloni, while my husband went with the chicken parmesan. Both lunch portions were friggin' HUGE! My husband actually had two full breasts of chicken on his plate served with a large side of pasta. Four noodles came in my order, and had big chunks of chicken in every bite. We made a good dent in the dishes, but still had plenty left over. We both agreed that it was good, but it didn't compare to the good ole' authentic Italian we both love so much."							
3IYI9285WSGPQYJLW45LFH6I09AJCI	"My husband and I went here after a day of looking for houses in the neighborhood, loving tapas we fantasized about this being ""our spot"" when we bought a house nearby.   The decor is a little odd, flags all around the bar, and near 100 or so pier one type tin lanterns with the stars punched out (you know the kind...).  Booths all in one corner, and large enough to fit 8, I personally don't like high tops, so sitting here felt super odd.   We sat waiting for a waitress to come over for about 5 minutes while it wasn't busy at all... not the end of the world, but something you defiantly note the first time you go somewhere new.  Being a spanish tapas place I ordered chicken nachos and my hubby ordered the chorizo, meatballs, and bacon wrapped dates (all tapas).  I know that tapas are served as their done, but being that nachos are chips on a plate, cheese, and then into a salamander to melt i totally thought those would be first.  No wrong, all 3 of his dished were served at the same time the bread was brought out... like literally less than 5 min after ordering.  I thought it to be strange at first, but upon tasting it was clear this was all reheated food.  The chorizo was hard, like the texture of a giant slim jim that had been left on a counter for a week.  The dates just rated off, almost as if the oil they'd been fried in had dent been changed in quite a long time.  The meatballs didn't gross me out as the other two did, but hey, you can keep those sitting in sauce and it'll keep well.   I had moderate hopes for my nachos as they were hopefully freshly prepared being that they were not served immediately.  nope.   Now its not hard to make nachos, as described earlier.  When I ordered I asked if the optional chicken was shredded or chunks, and our waitress said shredded, I was expecting the type of cooked in a salsa, until the chicken falls apart shred.  This was like canned chicken sent through a food processor, more baby food than ""shreds"".   In addition to this, the plate consisted of chips, shredded cheese(not fully melted btw), and olives. No peppers, no salsa, no sour cream, a plate of chips with cheese, olives and chicken.   So none the less we won't be back, I can't see where these good reviews came from, we did go on a sunday afternoon, so maybe at the slower times you get the crappy food? I don't know."							
38B7Q9C28GLB45XB01154N058IN96L	"My husband and I were in Vegas just last week, April 16-20, and we stayed at the Orleans, which is where this particular Friday's is located.  If I could, I would give a ""0"" star rating.  It will be a very long time, if ever, before we return.    We decided to eat at Friday's on Friday evening, April 19, which was our last day in Vegas. After having a drink or two at the Alligator Bar, we decided we wanted something to eat.  We walked over to Friday's and it was only about 11:45 p.m.  We were the only 2 people waiting in line and the hostess was nowhere in sight.  We saw people cleaning up tables and mopping the floors, and finally a gal looked over and asked us if we'd like to be seated.  That should have been my first indication that the dining experience was only going to go down from there.    We were seated, and Sara, a server, came over to take our drink order.  After a few minutes, she came back to take our dinner order.  My husband ordered a chicken dish and also a Caesar's salad.  Sara placed our food order and that was  about the last time she paid attention to us.  She totally forgot about my husband's Caesar's salad.  Evidently she felt it was more important to stand in the hallway and take pictures of some balloons that were up front.  Besides Sara, there were 4-5 other Friday's employees doing the same thing.  It was more important that they look at the pictures on their cell phones instead of paying attention to their customers!    Considering the restaurant was hardly busy, we waited about 30 minutes before our food came out.  When it did, it was just absolutely horrible.  My husband's chicken dish was so salty he could barely eat it; and the cheese that covered the chicken was totally burnt in many places.  I ordered Korean tacos (I think that's what they were called) and I was not impressed at all.  Very little meat; too many greens carelessly tossed inside the corn tortillas; and it didn't look or taste anything like the way it was described in the menu. Right before our food came out, Sara came over to our table to tell my husband that she ""just realized"" she forgot his salad!  Of course she did, because the cell phone was far more important to her!  Thankfully, we were not charged for the salad.    In the meantime, two more diners came into the restaurant.  They, too, were totally ignored by the employees.  Finally, the gentleman had to literally chase down a server and asked them if Friday's was still open!  Finally, after about 5-7 minutes, this couple was seated.    By this time, my husband and I were so upset we decided that we needed to speak to a manager.  Sara came over to ask how our food was, my husband said it wasn't a good experience and he wanted to talk to a manger.  Sara did get the manager and we expressed our displeasure.  The manager was nice enough to not charge my husband for his dinner and she did give us some gift certificates for complimentary appetizers and desserts.  However, the entire experience left me with very negative feelings about Friday's.    I don't know who does the training at this particular Friday's, but something is sorely missing.  Since when does a hostess station remain empty on a Friday night?  Customers should NOT have to chase down employees in order to get seated.  And the servers should not be standing in the hallway looking at pictures on their cell phones!  This is not ""service"".  After we complained to the manager, all of a sudden, the servers were doing their jobs.  It shouldn't have had to come to that!  Sara was one of the worst servers I've ever had.  If she's that poor of a server on a relatively slow night, I cringe to think how she is when it's busy!  Needless to say, Sara was not given a tip.  We do not tip for poor service and forgetfulness.    We've eaten at this Friday's in the past and we always had good food and service.  What happened on the Friday night we were there was just inexcusable.  If Sara and company don't want to work on a Friday night, they picked the wrong industry.  I do not recommend this Friday's at all, unless you enjoy being ignored, forgotten and served sub-par food.  I don't, and that's why I won't be returning to Friday's when I stay at the Orleans in the future.  I'd rather get a bag of junk food from the Orleans' gift shop before I go back to Friday's!"							
3YKP7CX6G2VDWYQDHVKT17VRRTAB7W	"My in-laws love this place so we went for dinner with a group of 8 with their CHASE rewards.  First of all, make sure you make your reservations really far in advance. They made them a couple weeks ahead of time on a weekend and there still was only a 5:30 or 9:30 reso. if you make a reservation for a large group of people they make you wait for everyone to get there to sit down. This was annoying because the last two in our party were late and we were getting hungry.  The ambiance was really cool! The lighting is nice for a large group or a date. Their service was ok. The server poured the rest of our bottle of wine and then didn't ask us if we wanted another bottle. We weren't finished with our meal so I thought that wasn't very smart of him.... More $$ more tip...  The food was pretty good for a corporate place. Very corporate, like a Buca Di Beppo or a Macaroni Grill but a little bit better.   I give it a 4 instead of a 3 because I feel it wasn't just ""ok"". The atmosphere and the singer guy with an accordion player accompaniment really stepped up the review from a 3 to a 4 star."							
3U18MJKL1U2L9OA6B2XD8ONZ9TECNE	"My recent visit to Fridays was great! I ordered a 22 oz. glass of Bud Light and my boyfriend ordered a bottle of Land Shark. Both of which were only $3.00 thanks to the happy hour special. They have great prices on alcohol and appetizers during happy hour (which just so happens to be all day everyday). I ordered the Gourmet 5 Mac & Cheese, it was delicious! The boyfriend ordered the Jack Daniels burger and his was just as good. We had an amazing server named Margarita who was fast, very attentive, and provided awesome customer service. After both of our entrees and 4 beers, our total came to $25 and some change. I like that. The only thing I didnt like, is they didnt cater to the current promotion of all sandwiches and salads are $5 due to the fact that they are in a casino."							
3NQUW096N6OTNQ0IN577T6I2YDB9LS	"My shout out for best pizza go's to Aj's of Verona.  It is a delicious foldable crunchy crusted pie with the perfect amount of toppings.  I order at least 2 pizza's a week from these guy's.  Great staff and are always willing to help out our community with sales for hockey, baseball, and football.  I eat their pizza at baseball games all summer and will continue to be a faithful patron as long as you continue to be in business.   Great job fellas!!"							
32L724R85L0CPC8JJR6RNGQPMDZIPI	"My sister, who lives in Vegas, took me here with her friends when I was visiting. With so many options on the strips, I was wondering why this was one of her favorites. Located in the Fashion Show Mall, the restaurant has easy access and parking. It has a great location.   The ambiance is just like every other Maggianos, with only about 1/3 of the tables having a view of the strip. We had made reservations for 8:00pm on a Wednesday night, and arrived 10 minutes late. Granted the restaurant was packed as ever, but there were empty tables. The Matre de gave us such a stern look of disapproval and then gave us a buzzer to wait near the bar. We waited for almost another 25 minutes, are you kidding me?   When we were finally seated at a table in the back, it took us way longer than expected to get the attention of the waiter to take our order. Maybe they have a problem with the ratio of tables per waiter. We could see that he was working hard, but we were hungry as well! The food was delicious, as expected. All of us were stuffed and enjoyed our meal. We actually loved the two elderly men who came to sing at our table =) The one with the Violin reminded us of the man in UP. With such good food, we were happy to have several boxes of leftovers to enjoy the next day.   But then, at the end of the night when we were paying the bill, we asked the waiter to split the bill amongst the guests. One of our friends actually paid in cash and the waiter actually assumed that his bill was his tip. This is before we got the receipt back to sign. The waiter assumed, and gave himself a 25% tip! That has never happened to me before, and sadly I have to say he didn't deserve it. Overall we had a great time and I wouldn't mind coming back, but I would hope they would improve on their service between then."							
3VMV5CHJZ8VWLDVVAKF87EE6W3TGTU	"My what a difference a year makes...both in how I write Yelp reviews and in my Maggiano's experience. I was back at Maggiano's for a private event and this time it was much better. Yes, they serve the dishes family style. Yes, you pay a slightly inflated price I attribute to the unofficial Strip surcharge. You get past all that and you'll find some good food here.   On this occasion there was one item that had me going back for more: Crispy Zucchini Fritte. The zucchini is a diet killer. Calorie counting? Yeah, forget about that. Just make sure you get yours before the rest of the table does.   The rest of the items I tried today were good, but there was nothing that warranted asking for a box to take it with me. The Fettuccine Alfredo was respectable, not the best I've ever had but it certainly was filling and I sneaked in a second small helping of it. The Chicken Piccata was actually disappointing. I masked my disappointment by having more Caesar salad and where did that Zucchini go again?   One note to the staff...the Lemon Cookies were too cold. But the Apple Crostada made me forget all about the cookies...  As this was a business function, the Maggiano's staff took great care of my needs and of everyone that I work with. All things considered 4 Stars seems appropriate.   Almost forgot to mention one more thing. The Valet seems super slow here. If you're in a hurry to get somewhere else plan accordingly."							
3S1L4CQSFXLLSH0RT0I9UOO27Z7AF3	"My wife and I come to Las Vegas twice or three times a year and always grab a cocktail or two at Maggiano's.  i am really glad to see that the owner realized to re-implement the best happy hour on the Las Vegas strip. For some reason they decided to stop this in May. But given the state of the economy, this was the best thing Maggiano's could do.  I will always continue to come here and recommend it to my friends.  Keep doing what you are doing."							
36FQTHX3Z37VVFPQFJH3OQJBMRO3BJ	"My wife and I love this place. This is my favorite Italian place in vegas. The prices are good. The food is great. We have been here twice. Both times service was great. Love the food. If you want real food. real serving sizes, and decent prices, come here for your Italian food needs."							
3SSN80MU8C484G0Y5L1KU9R5GGXKXJ	"My wife and I went for diner tonight for the second time, the food was magnificent. It reminds me of the Mediterranean rivire, when my wife and I were there on our honeymoon. We are very happy that this great restaurant for Spanish cuisine is finally near by on the west side. It was a wonderful experience, please do not change anything. This was a wonderful experience, I recommend it to anyone who likes spanish cuisine."							
3WJGKMRWVIPCNCJTM8JACJB5VPDCDX	never and ever							
3O0M2G5VC6IXPITXHD8Q7PGRCRH940	New restaurant in Summerlin. Food was good. Nice assortment of tapas and Spanish wine. Servers were attentive and friendly. Give it a shot!							
3OWZNK3RYL5L6W2DBAKTA6675YVU2G	Nice place for a lunch if you're in Fashion Show and don't want standard food-court food.							
3B9XR6P1WEB6GTRFI49Q4X00IOABJ3	Nice sized parking lot. Friendly staff.							
3PKVGQTFIH0JRP3301WJEZKSDELYRW	"Nice, respectable breakfast place near Encanto park.  It has a basic, chain brunch place feel, but with the friendly servers, somehow it seemed a bit more homey. Seats are basic wooden booths and the inside seems a bit cooler and darker than you'd expect for a bright Phoenix morning.   The menu is basic breakfast fare and I had a version of the Denver omelette with english muffins on the side. There was also a potato side that came with it: for the life of me, I believe it was homefries, but I'm not 100%. Obviously it wasn't too memorable, but I thought everything here was at least average.  Prices were reasonable and they dropped a coffee canteen at my table (and even refilled it when I had drank the whole thing) for easy access.   So, not a meal that you'll remember for the rest of your life, but there won't be any nightmares here either......"							
3X7837UUADE0AHAKMDSITHE84NZJ6Q	"No complaints about this Gyro joint tucked away deep in the Papago Plaza corner. It is a smaller place, but tidy and about six tables. I usually go for the Chicken pita as long as its white meat and this pita delivered. The freshly grilled pita was loaded with lots of chicken, fresh red onions and tomatoes. You can request lettuce also. Choice of side salad or fries. The side salad was workable with some feta, onions, only 1 olive though (not Kalamata) and a big side of Italian dressing that was bursting with good spices and flavor. Great deal at anytime for $6.95 and the register girl certainly is eye candy as well. Good hire and of course the key to any greek place is the Tzatiki sauce, which was thick and tasted like it should. Will be back."							
3XEDXEGFX3407QUN29CDLV4U69DK0P	NOOOOOOOO!! Who did I piss off to cause this calamity to fall upon me?  ******************CLOSED********************  In its place...Filiberto's Mexican Food & Bar.  I'm so confused.  Review coming.							
37G6BXQPLQ1L9J7CNLVP26I7ZGEQE8	"Normally, as a Vegas resident, the last place you go for a good time to drink is the Strip. Sure, it's great for all those vacationing there. But if you live there, you know that you can save the Strip for the tourists. Maggiano's Little Italy is the exception to this.  The happy hour is one of the best that I've experienced in Las Vegas. Boasting $2.50 appetizers and well drinks with $3 premium drinks and beers. This place is a great place to stop after work. You have to get there somewhat early or be forced to wait outside. The dining area is a bit cramped. But it's best just to situate yourself at the bar.  The appetizers are tasty and not of your typical bar flair. I usually favored the calamari and tomato mozzarella. Free Italian bread with Vinaigrette sauce make it even more delectable. All the better to wash down the drinks with.   With the main dining so close and the tunes of classic jazz standards overhead the ambiance can be busy. But it never seemed to escalate over a dull roar. So keeping conversation is never a problem. Along the walls are classic pictures of ""Old Vegas"" and it's easy to get stopped along the way to the restrooms and take in these old photos as if you were in a museum.   The bartenders pour a mean drink and remember the locals well. This isn't an easy feat when you serve as many drinks as these guys do. Each bartender has their ""specialty"" drink but don't push it down your throat. Ask bartender ""Chris"" about his Poma-tini. It's a pomegranate flavored martini that is refreshing, smooth, and very drinkable.  Sadly, I've never had a full fledged meal there. The happy hour was always enough for us. I have indulged in a slice of the cheesecake, which gives the Original Cheesecake Factory a run for it's money. The filling was smooth and creamy and the strawberry topping tart and sweet. And the best part was the price. Only $5 for this massive chunk.   Maggiano's Little Italy inside the Fashion Show Mall is outstanding and I recommend this place to any friends who are visiting.  The only think keeping this place from a Five Star Rating is the fact that it does get very busy and sometimes the bartenders tend to lose track of you.   Four Stars for: Great deals Strong drinks Super Hour Tasty appetizers"							
3YGYP13641PPFQZPTZN8XJML9UIRN0	"Not a bad chain restaurant with a bit of a hometown feel.  Portions are generous, prices reasonable, and service is friendly, makes this an acceptable place to go in the northern/central part of the Strip (Fashion Show Mall).  Ordered the Linguine di Mare (seafood), it's a decent dish with mussels, shrimp, bits of lobster with pasta in a tomato based sauce.  It's a huge portion but what's up with the tons of mussels?  Extreme dis-portion of mussels, which is more than half of the seafood.  I like mussels so that's ok with me, others may not be so happy.  The noodles need to be cooked longer in the broth as the flavors are not completely absorbed.  For desert, ordered the tiramisu, very light and creamy, with a strong coffee accent.  This would be a good choice."							
3YO4AH2FPD0MITSIFEWAHHG35F4Q0M	"Not amazing, not terrible. The green bean fries are pretty good but the rest of the menu is blah."							
3PR3LXCWSFFONKH71OAV40DP5MM9XF	Not nearly as good as all the other maggianos but ok for the area.							
3WUVMVA7OBJRXYRRUCCGXG4KJ41ZAG	"Not only was the food amazing and reasonably priced for the Strip, they were really accommodating to our time crunch because we were seeing a show after.  My table had gnocchi, chicken parmesan, eggplant parmesan, and the rigatoni D and they were all extremely good.  The only word of advice is to park in Treasure Island or the Wynn/Encore.  The mall parking is far from the restaurant."							
3W0XM68YZPB0EFF5YSGDZ0N4B1J1K9	"Not ordinarily a fan of Chinese food, I am a fan of China Chili!   For $10 (and that's with a soft drink) the lunch special portions are huge (like enough to get a box and take home leftovers, huge!) and the Mongolian beef  is an option.   Service is wham-bam-thank-you-ma'am but that works for a weekday lunch at a place that's 6 miles from the office.  Enjoyed dinner here with the family a few weeks back and service had a much more enjoyable pace.  Food has been consistently tasty. I like the batter they use for items like the lemon and orange chicken, etc. and the meat quality is good (i.e. all white meat chicken).   This place could get me craving Chinese and that's an accomplishment!"							
3XH7ZM9YX2A4QOVVSP43FIR14519RJ	"Not the 5 stars because it could be a bit less expensive, a bit at least. But the food, OMG, the food..... have the lobster+crab+etc fettucinni, it was soooooooooo good, the portions huge, really huge. I hope I could eat there again tonight."							
34YWR3PJ28Q6RQTU1SR2BPCW2IS0XU	"Not the best chicken. It appears to be pre-cut chicken strips and they are not marinated well or seasoned. Edible, but not the best chicken that could be used. Side salad is kinda tiny as well with hardly any feta cheese present in a greek salad. Plus the pita did not hold up well to-go. It steamed itself in the plastic and came out steamed, wet and clammy. Second time not the charm."							
3E22YV8GG1M43DJAG7JJSOM68CTNP3	"Not the cheapest mexican place around, but the flavors are there.  Comfortable atmosphere and excellent service.   The lunch specials for less than $10, and happy hour til 7 will have me coming back.  The black beans were good, and the spanish rice was fluffy and flavorful.  Chips were thin, crispy and not greasy."							
33P2GD6NRN8BIQ0J0HJYRN3BSQEKHQ	"Not to be confused by the George's Gyros on Mckellips and Miller.  This location is definitely a bar above that one.  The restaurant itself is very clean, air conditioned, and pleasant to be inside.  TV's are present to keep you entertained while you dine-in, or wait for your take-out order.  It was a little hard to find, as it's on the backside of Papago Plaza, I didn't even know this place was there until I found myself lost, and starving.  The food is pretty standard Greek food.  Delicious gyros, greek salad, etc., more often than not delivered by a Greek god of an owner.  It's nearly worth going to this place just to see him."							
38VTL6WC4ATUM2553UJGBYFWLWWY5I	"Nothing at this place was good except for the company, which I brought.  The $36 paella is not worth a penny.  And the sangria, don't get me started.  I don't know if the food was worse than the drinks or perhaps the do**** waiter should get the prize.  Save your dough and just don't go."							
3URJ6VVYUP30W5X3J2R84FBG7Q2O4S	"Nous cherchions un petit restaurant ou s'arrter un peu plus loin que les grand casinos, rsultat nous sommes arriv presque au bout du strip devant ce centre commercial, il tait dj une heure plutt avanc. Nous avons tout de suite trouv que l'ambiance de ce restaurant semblais calme et pose, exactement ce que nous recherchions.  Nous avons donc din dans ce restaurant et ce fut vraiment dlicieux, le tiramisu est le meilleurs que j'ai pu manger, pas trop alcoolis et plein de mascarpone comme je l'aime ! La quantit est au rdv et le rapport qualit prix vaut le coup  Je retournerais a Las Vegas ne serait ce que pour ce tiramisu !"							
3X2YVV51PUKR9F9MN6ZGNBHZY8S1W5	"off to Maggiano's with a party of thirteen. A very comfortable setting, so it seem. just a little bit too dim... which makes a perfect place for a date for her and him, but an even more perfect for a family dinner. as we waited to be seated, we got hungrier and hungrier. we were then told that with parties bigger than eight, we must do family style even if we each want our own plate. we talked to the waiter who spoke with the manager, because of misunderstanding, our own dish... we were able to order. we had 2 vegetarians in our party, so the chef actually came and took their orders personally! i ordered the clam pasta with red sauce, it was a big portion, even when it is a ""half"" course. so i split my meal with a friend. the dish was so delicious, we finished til the very end. our glasses of water were never empty, for the waiter always refills it every minute oh so gracefully. the accordion player in the restaurant was very sweet and nice a friend spoke with him for a bit and he played her a song without thinking twice we were also celebrating our friend's birthday, another song he played for her and must i say, it was very very lovely... a great environment for a birthday party. the price was decent for the big portion of meal, i have to say, it is a very good deal."							
3LVTFB9DE5YJTX33TGLD293JCWUGQG	"Oh boy. This was probably my best meal during my stay in Vegas. The food here is breathtakingly good, particularly the appetizers. Get the stuffed mushrooms; you will thank me. The bruschetta is also worth mentioning; I guarantee you'll be asking for more bread to scoop up the abundance of tasty tomatoes. For dinner, I had the chicken marsala which was very good. My boyfriend got chicken franchise which (according to him) was decent. The potatoes and salad that his meal came with were excellent. Our waiter was very sweet. Everything, for me, was truly above average. I hope the Maggiano's in the tri-state are equally amazing."							
360ZO6N6J1ZDT8I3NH8MTJXRYI19MU	"Ok this has to be the worst TGI's I have ever been too. The sliders were cold and flavorless. My daughters pizza looked like cold pizza hut pizza. My husband asked for his steak to be med rare it came well done.  When he mentioned it to the server he had them make another one. This time it seemed like the cook said you want it ""rare mutha f'r"" here you go. It was browned on both sides and blue and cold in the center. I believe that is rare not med rate. So the manager came agreed and took the steak off our bill. The server seemed to busy to even bring us refills. I asked for 3 waters to make sure that we has plenty to drink incase we ran out. All around horrible go to fudruckers if your gonna eat here at the Orleans."							
3AJA9FLWSCE0YZJP5OAMBMCLK7DFID	"Ok, I love this place! I wrote a review for Maggiano's a while ago stating that it was just ok ( that was a location in California). But this Maggiano's is really good. Whether going in for a drink and some appetizers, or ordering a full dinner, you will love the variety and taste of the Italian food.  Plus, it overlooks part of the strip! Fun!"							
3JU8CV4BRLSMLYJMHMJW7DMBYMZOPK	"OK. I am not  a connoisseur of  Italian eateries, but I have been to enough  Italian restaurants in my time to give a solid review. First, my friends and I made reservations for 7 pm on a Saturday evening 3 days in advance. We get to the restaurant at 6:55pm and the hostess gave  us the pager gadget and says it will be a few minutes. Half an hour later, we still have not been seated yet. I wonder why we  even bothered to make reservations. In my book, you make a reservation for a certain time and when that time comes,  you get seated. that is the point of making a RESERVATION and the basic meaning of the word. This is a big NO NO in my book. That is either poor planning or mismanagement or both. If I am gonna spend some bills in a fancier style restaurant, I expect to be taken care of. that is what I am paying for and have no problem doing so.  The silver lining ,if there is one, is that we weren't the only ones. there were numerous folks there having the same frustrations and issues with this topic and wishing to speak to the manager. Not a good sign. the waitress was nice enough and adequate though. the only issue I had with her is that we got our vinegar and oil for our bread, but guess what, no bread. only after 20 minutes and asking did we receive our bread. again, not what I expect from a  purported higher class establishment. the food was adequate but not what I would call earth shattering. the calamari was tasty and the Rigatoni D was tasty and sauce was good. I have had better and worse.  my friends all liked what they got from what they told me. Overall, mediocre experience at best.One thing I have learned over the years is that  you can tell a lot about a place by the way they keep the bathrooms and I must say that was horrible and maybe the worst I have ever seen except for a few roadside gas stations in my days. It  was an absolute mess with dirty paper towels, water, all over the floor and overall condition to be filthy. again, I hope they don't keep the kitchen like the do the restroom. I don't even want to think about that.  Overall, not a horrible experience but not one for the books either. In my opinion, Carrabas easily matches and super cedes Maggianos overall for a much better eating experience and price. Oh,  Almost forgot, I will give a 4 or 5 on the overall ambiance and feel of the restaurant.  It was a comfortable and luxurious setting, and decorated nicely but unfortunately, the wrapping on the package was much better than the gift inside."							
3KQC8JMJGC85MSSCFBRZA1M9H4TH3D	"On a Friday night restaurant was busy, but the service was top drawer. Food was very good and we will be back. Prices reasonable."							
3MWOYZD5WV4MID7917643OHGY7YONO	"On my last outing to this venerable restaurant overlooking the Strip on the edge of Fashion Show, Maggiano's redeemed itself with a fine repast and picturesque view of Encore.  Our telephoned request for a booth with a Strip view was honored despite the chagrined look of other hopefuls whom the maitre d' had to fend off to preserve our pre-reserved perch.  Golden Calamari Fritte was on point and well made this time.  Both rings and tentacles were lightly deep fried and excellent with great requested Lemon Aioli and mild Marinara Sauce.  Bread and butter were very good, and, as always, a bowl of savory Tuscan Orzo & Sausage Soup sporting Italian sausage, fennel, white beans, fresh tomatoes, and plenty of orzo was excellent.  Where this soup is concerned, to enjoy more stomach-warming, fluid rustic goodness I now always order a bowl rather than a mere cup.  A Side Caesar Salad with grated Parmesan and Focaccia Croutons in a creamy Caesar Dressing was excellent.  And, Stuffed Chicken Pizzaiola with Mozzarella, Ricotta, Tropheo Pasta, Pomodoro, Red Peppers, and Pepperoncini was fine once I got to the middle of the chicken.  It was similar to Chicken Cordon Bleu but zestier.  As usual, a side of Fontina Potatoes was creamy and delicious.    This time we experienced excellent service as Noel, our server, without any prodding, carefully spaced out our meal orders so that the various dishes would not come out of the kitchen on top of each other.  All went well except for me killing one of my favorite Polo shirts with food stains from Marinara Sauce followed by splatters from the Orzo & Sausage Soup.  After treating the stubborn marks with both Zout and Goo Gone, after six washings they still remain.  I will not give up either the sauce or the soup.  But next time I am in their close proximity, regardless of appearances I will don a napkin to protect the front of whatever shirt I may be wearing at the time!  For a chain, this is truly a fine one!"							
3BAKUKE49HSM1JS0OCPA0C9I6TD1R2	On weekend mornings they have a great breakfast menu which is definitely worth checking out. The place looks like a dungeon so between that and the beer they brew themselves it's definitely my favourite pub experience in Waterloo.							
3BFNCI9LYK68T3M0225NJOXF31X37X	One of the better hummuses I've had in AZ and the gyros are delicious. The prices are reasonable as well.							
30EMX9PEVKZ08ZEZBBVXV1AD11VSKJ	One star for great prices. The second star for great food. We started out with bread which I thought was very fresh. The Calamari appetizer that we ordered came out fairly fast and was really good. The four cheese ravioli was fairly good and I am very picky when it comes to eating ravioli. It could have been better with more sauce. The third star is for the price which isn't bad. The fourth star goes to the atmosphere which i thought was very clean and well decorated. Minus one star for the long wait for the table and not enough waiters.							
3IVEC1GSLPF53V9NG7G1YLNRWCJ1JA	"One word: Bacado.  Bacon, avocado and cheese in an omelet.  Seems common place, but no other restaurant does it so well.  Breakfast and brunch only."							
33Q5P9PUSP2FQDOPEQ873BU8J7MCZV	Only tried 2 dishes - squid in ink and chicken with peppers. Squid was fine but it's just squid grilled. The sauce is ink sauce - not much taste. Chicken was obviously heated - sauce was hot but chicken was like warm. It tasted like tomatoe sauce without much more than that. Overall it was ok. Nothing special nor terrible. The bread was poor but the aioli sauce was tasty. They'd do better by serving tortillas or pita. My piece of bread was a bit stale. This place is really close to where I live do was hoping it was great but it's just ok.							
32XN26MTXZZBRWC5N9OE0VH9V9HL0S	"Other than the atmosphere, I don't have too much positive to say about First Watch.  The eggs were disgusting! They were bright yellow and had the most bizarre texture.  You would have thought they were feeding the chickens fabric softener.  I had a carrot cake pancake, which i thought was a pretty clever idea. Unfortunately, it was multi-grain.  Let me tell you, a multi-grain carrot cake pancake is just a bit too much going on for me.  The service was fair but far from great.   Overall, far from a wow, I wouldn't go out of my way to come back. 2.5 stars."							
3RKHNXPHGWCGNC630GQXA2S1MYGKUR	Our awesome server Manny G was great with the service and was even better exposing us to new drinks. New drinks that were not in the menu were a treat. My friends and I return to restaurants constantly due to their cocktails and food. But mind you the cocktails keep us coming. Thank you Manny for the great drinks we (6 of us) hope we see these in the menu soon. Thanks so much Firefly!!!							
3L84EBDQ37I2KG1R62MV4FJ3K7JKKV	"Our waiter, Antonio, was AH-MAZE-ING!!! He took the best care of us. The most incredible service. Love him!!!!"							
304QEQWKZP0JXHF20146SCL3QEMO0C	"Overall, I agree with the vast bulk of the other reviewers.  I found the service to be friendly, prompt, and attentive.  My only major complaint was the Chicken Saltimbocca had full-sized sage leaves under the crust on the chicken breast.  Biting into one of these and eating it was akin to eating a car pine air freshener.  Don't get me wrong I LOVE sage (it's a big reason why I ordered that dish) but a more deft hand would have used it to advantage not like an assault weapon."							
3KWGG5KP6JIFR6P6Z1IDV9YZ435MCP	"Overrated.  Ugh.    I have eaten at Maggiano's a couple of times and I have NEVER had a good experience.  It was the same story both times - they tend to serve customers based on who looks like they're ballers.  I guess that means I don't look like I'm not balling out of control, because I always have to practically beg for a drink refill.  It makes me wonder what it is that makes them classify people that way... I was dressed in nice business attire... so did I look like a redneck or something?  Was it because I was young?  Either way, the Maggiano's staff needs to wise up:  you never know who someone is and how well they will tip by appearances alone.  Just sayin'.  The food isn't that great either.  During both visits, my fianc and I ended up with pathetic salads, burned or under-seasoned entrees, and virtually no service whatsoever.  Both times, something had to be sent back because it was either made incorrectly or was disgusting.  Pathetic.  Get it together.  Is there something I'm just not ""getting"" that makes this place so special?  As far as I have seen, the elitist attitude from the servers amounts to jack squat.  They can't deliver on any front - food OR service.  This is another scenario where I really feel like you're paying for ambiance, and as I always say, I can't EAT ambiance.    I know!  Maybe I should go be a baller at the local McDonald's - I could order the entire dollar menu and I GUARANTEE the food would be better than Maggiano's!"							
351S7I5UG9C8H2GCLUEZVS0UZDOJN0	"Oxtail was good.. other than that the flavors of the food were REALLY bland. Their flan had a really bitter sauce, that was gross.. wont be back to dine here there are so many better options for Tapas in town.."							
3ATYLI1PRTIQZNGOM9ECAH0ZPNTOJK	"Paid a visit over 4 years ago for high school homecoming.  The server insisted on telling me what was standard tipping.  That was some of the most extreme unprofessionalism I have ever experienced at a restaurant.   On another note, the Veal is good.  Just be kind to the young, we work in restaurants too."							
3LEG2HW4UF3WNE5NGLPUO654VBH2FQ	Park in valet behind it take elevator straight up to the restaurant. BEST fried zucchini and lemon aioli anywhere ( this is truly why I come here !!) .							
334ZEL5JX6VJYQZE93NQ2IRML65SO3	Place was packed on a Sunday night - we opted to sit at a high top in the bar area. Unfortunately we were just inside the door and every time somebody went in or out we got blasted with a strong cold wind.  Service was friendly but pretty slow. The salads were huge and delicious.   The chicken piccata was rather odd - the pasta was served in its own bowl on the side. I did my best to mix it with the chicken.							
3VGZ74AYTGWFZWTKOYKII4E28HTCG7	"Place- Nice, spacious great place for a meal. They have private rooms in the back. Clean and bright. They have outside seating.   Menu- The lunch specials are not bad. The dinner menu was pretty big. I saw the portions for dinner and they were huge. We ordered the stuff mushrooms as an appetizer and they came to our table in 5 minutes. A little too fast if you ask me. I hope they were not sitting under a heat lamp. Fettuccine in lobster sauce was pretty good. Chicken picatte fed two people just fine. The creamy chicken and potato soup was awesome. Next time, I will order a bowl.   Service - The service was good. Our waiter, however, wouldn't shut up. Don't you hate it when they keep trying to talk to you and just  go a bit too overboard and waaay too personal with the conversation. It was comment after comment. I could not really enjoy the  time with my friends. At first I felt bad but then I realized that he was borderline flirting with my girl friends. Especially in the end when my friend was trying to get out the booth and he extended his hand an exclaimed "" need some help miss""? My friend politely said ""no thank you"". While I was thinking in my head ""WHAT A PERVERT"". To be honest, he probably gets off by touching women any chance he gets.   Minus one star for the server that wouldn't shut up."							
31SIZS5W59VAINCH9RFP1DHQE54QRL	Please try the bruschetta. Really good and you can taste the fresh garlic. Very good service and the food is good.							
3WA2XVDZEMXSZ1OS8CHRW11GZF36ES	"Poor service from the moment we walked in the door. No hostess available, so we stood there waiting. I noticed the hostess cleaning a table in the corner of the restaurant. She looked up saw us standing there and went back to cleaning the table. (there were quite a few clean empty tables already, so i don't think continuing to clean that table was imperative. Were finally shown to a table by a server and given menus. Waited at least 10 minutes, then busboy asked for drink order, then brought us our water. a different waiter showed up, no intro, and just said ""what can I get you"". we ordered and he zipped away. Food was not very good at all, except for Calamari. Plate presentations were terrible. Sauces slopped in the serving dishes, no garnishes, smudge marks just thrown together.  They overcharged us $1 dollar for the sauteed mushrooms, and when I brought it to the attention of the waiter, he was like ""aahhh, ookaay, I'll tell the manager"". As if my issue was petty and undeserving. Brought us the check and still hadn't corrected the price overage, stating that he did tell the manager. I can only assume the manager didn't think the change was a big deal either. I have to guess, because I never saw a manager. Too bad, i wanted this to be a good place to go since we live right up the street, but I guess we will need to continue to patronize Firefly for our Spanish tapas fix."							
3F6045TU7D4YMOZ9Y84HOXR7YJV99W	"Poor service, and just okay food.  The tapas were too small to share and nothing was really that great."							
3X4Q1O9UBH2XFSFML0PF7RVQYSSO7C	"Pretty dreadful service one afternoon recently for lunch. I really hate when servers decide whether to give good service to tables on whether they think the customers will leave a good tip. Our water glasses sat empty for over a half hour while our waiter filled other tables' glasses and avoided eye contact with us. He delivered our salads and then extremely awkwardly reached over us to get the remaining place settings. I understand that might be a corporate policy but why would you set food down, ask if you can get anything else (usually a good indicator it is okay to start eating) and then reach over your guests? Wrong order of things, weird waiter. That was the last time he visited our table before we were finished, leaving our salad bowls for our enjoyment. I also had a discount that said nothing about not being valid on weekends but they would not honor it. The other staff was not super friendly either, so I did not feel that complaining would elicit a response.  This was a one star experience overall but the food is truly amazing here that I have to give them two. They also had the large lunch menu displayed outside the restaurant when they were not serving their lunch menu on weekends. What a weird day at Maggiano's."							
3SCKNODZ0XWFX7FAKLP2S2VL8INN7W	"Pretty good experiences all the times we've been here.  We love the Jack Daniels grilled items and sauce. Parmesan steak fries are amazing by the way.  This time our server Christina (with red tinted hair) was pretty awesome. Our drinks was always refilled and we had everything we needed from the get go. She did an awesome job and I would recommend to ask for her, especially since past reviewers are unhappy with the other waitresses service.  Food is pretty decent for a chain restaurant. Nothing too spectacular, however nothing extremely horrible. For thai tacos, two steaks and shrimp,two sides, and sodas the bill was $61, not bad!"							
335VBRURDJGFHKQQ6JK3GBSIPGB9E6	Pretty good food. Shows up hot & fast and the service was some of the best I've had. Definitely worth a visit if you're in the area.							
3CMV9YRYP3HIT2DR9HYKI0W5UIOJLY	Pretty good service. The appetizers were amazing and love the happy hour!! Bartender and hostess were nice!							
3CESM1J3EIJMG1AJTCBXI78G6J7W6X	"Pretty much one of the best places in town for Italian food.  If you wanna do some shopping and get some grub, go to the Fashion Show Mall and find this place.  Greatest Lagasna you will ever have.  And their cheesecake is to die for.  Amazing service and the atmosphere is not stuffy but very nice.  Have a large party or want something more intimate, they pretty much do anything for you here.  And they even have private banquet rooms for parties!!! LOVE LOVE LOVE!!!!!!"							
3O71U79SRB5VYNE2WN8DAE2HQ6QSMO	"Probably the nicest McDonalds I've been in in a while. Staff is friendly, place is spotless, and on table has video games built into the counter for the kids. Pretty cool."							
335VBRURDJGFHKQQ6JK3GBSIPGA9E5	"Quality food, Large portions. Really great prices.  The people by the bar are what you may call riff raff. This is def not a special occasion kind of place. It is very casual. Hungry on a budget? Come here."							
3G57RS03HHL4LHCYA9CL2UER6H2256	Quality ingredients = good food. Chicken Francese is the bomb! ...Also sausage & peppers appetizer was really good. ...Cool location is directly across from Wynn.							
391FPZIE4C2PLM5VUVN0XAC9UHCHUK	"Quick Tip: Great Italian food :) has a small banquet room in the back, too.  A friend of mine recently got married and had his reception here. We came in through the back of the restaurant and I was amazed at how beautiful it looked. The hallways were decorated with vintage looking furniture, and the reception hall itself was beautiful. It had a big windown that you can see part of the Las Vegas strip from. Lots of light.  The dinner was sit-down buffet style. We had three courses: Appetizer, Main course and dessert. The food was awesome, most especially because there was only one dish with tomatoes! This was a special Italian restaurant and I was so happy to be able to try all their food.  The salad was excellent: fresh lettuce, blue cheese and dressing. There were two types, but I didn't get to taste the other one. The calamari was really good, too.  The cheese ravioli was a big hit at our table. Something so simple was so delicious, and felt so light in your mouth. There was chicken florentine, a steak with mushroom and then eggplant parmesian. I heard that this one was the best dish out of the main course, but i couldn't sample it. Guess why? :P  The dessert was cheesecake with strawberries, as well as a fruit plate with pineapples, honeydew, cantaloupes, grapes, strawberries, watermelons. Fresh. everything just tasted so fresh.  The best part of this dinner was that we found out that this reception place was a restaurant towards the front entrance. There is a full bar, and it looked like really efficient servers. They were all polite, too.   This is a place to definitely check out if you aren't interested in buffets, or just want to sample a different type of life with Vegas. Definitely a great atmosphere, with great food...and even better with great friends and family."							
36GJS3V78V627AZQYQ1458RXY12JGS	"Reading over the reviews submitted so far for Toros, I am baffled.  Most yelpers rave about the wonderful food; the few exceptions thought the food was fine but too pricey.  I couldn't disagree more with either camp.  First, the food.  I have a fairly strict standard for eating out:  Trader Joe's frozen entrees.  Huh wha??  Lemme 'splain ... a while back I discovered that Trader Joe's offers remarkably good frozen food - no, not as good as making everything from scratch with fresh ingredients, but orders of magnitude better than any other frozen cuisine.  After sampling a few dishes, I decided that if a restaurant wasn't noticeably better than TJ's frozen, it's just not worth it.  That's when I decided to never again eat at the likes of Friday's, Bennigan's, Outback, etc.  Mind you, the restaurant doesn't have to be fancy.  I'll eat at a hot dog stand, as long as it serves really good dogs.  Although Trader Joe's doesn't offer Spanish tapas, I'm pretty sure that if they did, they'd be a helluva lot better than the menu at Toros.  Wow, what a morass of mediocrity.  Started with the chicken in saffron sauce and the braised oxtail.  The chicken had no flavor (just bland white meat chicken), and the saffron sauce just tasted like a generic cream sauce, straight out of some bottle.  The braised oxtail meat was OK, but the sauce it was drowning in was off.  If I kept the meat and vegetables out of the weird sauce, it was OK.  Then I ordered bacon-wrapped dates, grilled asparagus, and seared salmon.  The bacon-wrapped dates tasted awfully generic.  I don't know what the difference is, but the b-w dates at Jaleo are a thousand times better.  The grilled asparagus with aioli was the best dish of the night, although that's damning with faint praise.  And the seared salmon with spinach and garlic sauce was nowhere nearly as good as whatever frozen salmon dish at Trader Joe's.  I didn't realize it was a garlic sauce until I saw it on the menu just now because it tasted like flavorless white cream sauce (tasted the same as the supposedly saffron cream sauce - I'm guessing Toros's ""saffron"" is Yellow Dye #something).  The salmon was overcooked, therefore a bit dry and lacking flavor.  And the spinach was horribly salty.  Finally, on to dessert.  Apparently the Spanish version of rice pudding is rice pudding with cinnamon sprinkled on top.  If you're craving rice pudding, buy it at Costco - Costco rice pudding is worlds better than the stuff at Toros.  The atmosphere left me somewhat annoyed.  The server/bartender (I ate at the bar) was very nice but got a bit annoying because instead of asking me how things were, she kept asking, ""Isn't everything just amazing?  Isn't the food fantastic?  Don't you just love it?""  No, no, and HELL no.  I ordered a glass of sangria, $6 for cheap red wine mixed with 7-Up and a lot of ice.  Toros is also a ""Nevada-style pub,"" which means they have video poker at the bar.  For most of my meal, there was a group playing the machines, and they were quite raucous when celebrating every little win.  I'm not criticizing them, but be prepared for that if you eat here.  The one thing I'm not criticizing at Toros is the prices.  The menu prices are all very reasonable.  I had a 50% off Groupon, but even at full price, my bill for the large quantity of food I ordered wouldn't have come to much.  Also, they have happy-hour (forget the hours) when a lot of the items are half-price.  If you're idea of a great steakhouse is Outback or great Italian is Olive Garden, then you'll probably love Toros.  Me?  I'll save my money for Jaleo.  If I had the opportunity to eat 52 meals at Toros for the same price as 1 meal at Jaleo, I'd savor the meal at Jaleo and enjoy my heated-up Trader Joe's the rest of the year."							
3I7KR83SNATI3KI025V6E65N9D79KQ	Really good with good healthy options! I had the chikichimi which was wonderful! Came with fruit to finish tha job whaaaaaaaaaattttt							
388CL5C1RJ3M2WI1LHVZ6NGQHQKHLR	Really good. Excellent food. Best waiter ever. Would eat there again.							
30Z7M1Q8UY0CD2Q4LMC3KW7GKVUA8M	"Recently visited this place again for the second time. The food here is just so damn good, mouthwatering dishes I would say. Also, this place has a wonderful view to the strip and very nice customer service."							
3X2YVV51PUKR9F9MN6ZGNBHZY8RW1Z	"Recommended by another chef, this proved to be a true gem.   Delicious, beautiful presentation  and reasonable, not bad for overpriced Scottsdale."							
3IQ9O0AYW6FAH41Q08FBSQRMBGKTIY	Restroom needed some touched up. On the way to restroom passing by bar area paper towel on the floor displayed look unsanitary. Plate for bread needed to be checked under for remains of food sticked in it.  Presentation							
3IVKZBIBJ0P969DR5QS0I9UL9KRHS4	Rock-solid new design. The Chipotle of gyros in Scottsdale. Highly recommend the Picado!							
30EV7DWJTVBQ565J8DTL34TWHR7Y6Y	"Ron took great care of us... Sangria is fantastic... Even though I didn't have any food, the atmosphere with the gaming is all I could as for... Great local bar"							
3B9J25CZ25TIP12BJYEZ7IX5WSMCSQ	Ron totally took care of our needs at the bar.  Steve the manger was totally accommodating to all our needs.  Food and drink was totally great.  Piquillo peppers were to die for.....we will be back!!							
3KLL7H3EGDHPY1UVZLX5TWES8OLHV9	"Rosatti's doesn't deliver to Verona (I can't blame them), so we decided to call Falbo's.  And that's when we discovered Falbo's in Verona closed and is now ""AJ's Pizzeria and Diner"" (thankfully the phone number is the same).  An extremely helpful and friendly gentleman answered the phone, informed us of the recent change, and offered their web address so that we could browse the new menu.  After a quick peek, we called back and placed the order: spinach cheese bread, a garden salad, and a large thin crust pie with the gold-standard for toppings (sausage, onion, mushroom, green peppers).  We were quoted a delivery time of around 40 minutes, which seemed totally fair.  After we hung up and poured a glass of vino, the phone rang - a computer glitch wiped out part of the delivery address; the gentleman was extremely apologetic - it wasn't a big deal at all.  These guys seem like super friendly and helpful folks.  After less than 25 minutes, the doorbell rang and our bounty had arrived.  The driver was very professional and friendly as well - seems like they want to really make a good impression with their customers.    We started with the salad; it was huge, and very fresh.  The slices of tomato were a bit unusual, but all things considered, the salad was good.  It featured cukes, tomato, onion, bell peppers and croutons (which appeared to be pre-made).  From the salad, we tried the spinach cheese bread, which featured a french loaf, cut in half, buttered, and topped with fresh spinach and mozzarella cheese, which was then baked/melted.  The bread wasn't real crisp - my guess is that it sat in the styrofoam container too long and probably steamed itself a bit.  We saved it and will reheat it in the oven.  The pizza looked excellent - perfect thickness of the crust; plenty of uber-fresh toppings, and just the right amount of cheese.  We dug-in, and while the outer part of the crust was nice and crisp, the center had gone soft, just like the spinach cheese bread did.  Again, I'm guessing it's because we left it in the box for too long, or that the fresh veggies ended-up steaming the pizza a bit as it cooked?    Despite the flopping inner crust, the pizza was superb.  The sauce was excellent, the sausage was delish, and the veggies were cut thin and piled high.  We both ate more than we should've, but it tasted soooo good we couldn't stop ourselves.  I'll definitely order from AJ's again, and will ask for the crust to be a little more well done.  I also wonder if a sheet of parchment or something on the bottom during transport would help keep things more crisp?    I wish these guys the best of luck with the new venture.  Give them a try!  AJ's = WIN  Food = 3.5 stars Service = 5 stars (fast, friendly, helpful) Value = 4.25 stars  I'd prefer to rate AJ's as 3.5 - 3.75 stars, but aside from the softish crust, it was a 4+ star experience, so we'll bump 'em up a bit."							
3P0I4CQYVYNC57GNT8XRZ7U7RJ2OWF	"Sara our server was FANTASTIC.  We had a large group of 16 people for our wedding dinner.  I had made reservations 2 weeks in advance. They called the day prior to the reservation to confirm and then they called the morning of the reservation date to get my order for the family style dinner. I selected from the Chefs selection menu. Lobster baked tilapia, chicken parmesan, mushroom il fornaio and beef tenderloin medallions. For appetizers we selected the calamari, caprese and bruschetta.  For dessert we selected creme brle and tiramisu. Absolutely everyone enjoyed everything they ate! The meat entrees were all tender and juicy. Nothing was over cooked or under cooked. The food was served timely- longest wait was 5 mins between appetizers and entrees.  The portions and amount of food can be described as ABUNDANT. The customer service was perfect. They allowed us to bring our wedding cake earlier in day and served it at the end of the wedding feast! I highly recommend them for special events!"							
3AQN9REUTFWPQFKYI01Z9A3OYDUYDQ	"Saturday night me and my husband decided to take in a movie at the Orleans Casino and grab a bite to eat. Since TGI Fridays is conveniently located inside the casino where are movie was playing we ate there. Our server Jami was Great!!! She took the time to explain the endless appetizer specials and suggested her favorite of the apps was garlic parmesan boneless wings, took her suggestion and was glad I did. After dinner Jami suggested dessert since she was right about the wings I took her suggestion on the oreo madness glad I did. Overall we had an awesome time, great food, great service, and reasonable prices. Will definitely return"							
3LEG2HW4UF3WNE5NGLPUO654VBFF21	"Second time here and first time to review. A friend of ours made dinner reservations for Sat evening by the window and within 10 mins of arrival, we were seated right above The Strip facing the Wynn. My recommendation is to bring 3 friends so you can order the ""Family Style"" meal on the back of the menu. There are three price points and we chose the $30.95/PP. You choose and everyone shares 2 salads, 2 appetizers, 2 pasta dishes, 2 entrees, and 2 deserts. And if you want more, just ask. It is AYCE. :)  My rating is for the ""Family Style"" experience."							
3BJKPTD2QCSNA349QV9K6ISDYC3TR2	"Second time to this Maggiano's... The first time we sat on the patio and I swear a cockroach bit my leg. SOOOOOO GROSS. I don't think that's the restaurant's fault... The interior appears very clean. Came here for dinner the other night to meet up with a friend at 7pm but hadn't called to make a reservation. My boy and I got there a little early so we put our name down (wait was 30 mins, nbd) and took a seat at the bar. The bartender took a minute to get to us but was friendly and made an AWESOME drink for me. Moscato Mojito. Definitely try it!!  Within 10 minutes, our buzzer went off for our table. I brought it over with my still nearly full drank-drank but had to wait like 10 more minutes at the stand to be seated. I get that it was much faster than the 30 minute prediction... But don't tell me my table is ready then make me wait again while with a drink in hand. Whatev.   We were seated, our server said he'd be right with us. Our server came back and took our drink order. We ordered 3 of those moscato mojitos (one extra for our late friend lol). I'm telling you! Try it!!! Our friend showed up shortly after and we got our drank-dranks. Server asked if we'd decided on our meals yet... Our friend just sat down.... Give us like 2 more minutes? Ok cool! He came back like 15 minutes later. With bread and oil. We ordered and asked for vinegar to go with the oil. He never brought it....  Meanwhile the table next to us had sat down 5 minutes after us and was being served their food. Again, I get that we were taking our time and our friend was late, WHATEV. But their server was ON IT. I was able to get his attention and asked for vinegar. It took him 12 seconds. I was so jealous of the table next to us.   Food finally came like 30 minutes later and I was a little disappointed with the size of the salad that my boy and I agreed to share because it was ""enough for two""... Maybe enough for two kids. My ravioli and side of broccolini were really good tho. Our server came back 10 minutes later to ask if we needed anything. I was gonna get a dessert but after waiting forever for our meal and having never gotten vinegar from him, I decided to pass fearing it would take too long. Just the check thanks! Ugh. That was another 10 minute ordeal. I don't recall him thanking us or looking forward to our next visit but that may have been said...  Overall, 3 stars only cuz our service was slow and spotty. Memorable I suppose but not for the right reasons. Food was good. Nothing to write home about but satisfying. Dranks were BOMB. I'll go back just for that Moscato Mojito! Better luck next time though, Maggiano's."							
3D42WVSDH8BMOZYU96WPXA69AQAYF1	"Seriously, people giving this place high reviews? When we went here last, the chicken was dry and had a burnt coating that slid right off. And it was somewhat temperate in the middle, confirming my suspicion that this was made earlier and then just re-fried, cut, and served. I don't think any restaurant should get any stars when they just open a can or packet (yes, I'm talking about the vegetables and sauces) and mix with pre-cooked meat. That IS NOT good Chinese food. As someone who has lived where there are actual Chinatowns (Boston and San Francisco), I know what very good Chinese food is, and this place certainly is not.  Oh, and the lighting. Who said that bright, overhead lighting creates a pleasant atmosphere for dining?   I have yet to find a Chinese restaurant here in the Phoenix area that actually puts together fresh ingredients from scratch. If anyone knows of one, please let me know."							
32CAVSKPCE5EHBKHS6KF5NW2DSHU1Z	"service here is GREAT! came here to celebrate a friend's birthday. we got hooked up with a nice table right by the window with an awesome view of the strip. our waiter was on it, always coming by asking if we had questions about the menu. he brought out our drinks right away. he was even nice enough to bring out small bowls of salad without any meat in them because one of our friends didn't eat meat. so considerate! we had a party of 8 so we decided to order family style...2 appetizers, 2 salads, 2 entrees with unlimited refills on all food. BEST. IDEA. EVER. we got a taste of everything and there was more than enough food to go around. i love this place! =)"							
3OLZC0DJ8JVPUW5F53FQT8F7810VIG	Service is great and the atmosphere is cool. My gf and I are fans of TGI Friday and have been to multiple ones in Vegas. I just hate to say but the food at this one was not nearly as good as the other ones. We were disappointed because at places like this you look for consistency but this one wasn't prepared as well as when we went to the others. The service and everything were great which is why I gave it a 4 star but I will definitely just go to the other ones.							
322ZSN9Z5G0G9X2BFJD7YPH36YK4TV	Service is great and the food is super good! One of my fav Italian restaurant!							
3IVKZBIBJ0P969DR5QS0I9UL9KSHS5	Service is horrible. Slow. No fountain drinks. Lagsania was horrible. Tasted like a TV dinner.  Very disappointed from the brand standard.							
3KI0JD2ZU1Y7QM9IL43LQR9ZDSZ676	"Service was great! Food was either bland or too salty. Sangria is tasty. Entertainment was great, nobody seemed to notice but us.  Would come back for sangria and entertainment."							
3FO95NVK5CGMV3RU1V4UWDWRWTQRSC	"Service was iffy. We dd the ""light family"" buffet, which included 2 appetizers, 2 salad, 2 pasta choices and lemon cookies. We ordered the calamari with warm mainara sauce and stuffed mushrooms. For the salad we ordered the Cesar and Chopped (bacon pieces, nano bits of avocado, tomato, and greens). As for the pastas, we ordered chicken linguini and another one, which I forgot. Initially the purpose of doing the family style buffet was to get the unlimited refills, but our waiter was quite stingy with it.   Hmm, overall verdict?? After going on a strict heavy pasta diet, I wasn't really a big fan of this heavy strict pasta meal. Maybe one day I'll give it another shot and the ratings will be better."							
3Q9SPIIRWJ2N33MMJPS9YCA222XWAN	"Service:  3.5 Stars  Attentive.  Cordial.  Tapped out our drinks.  Made sure we were fine and dandy like a jovial Dean Martin singing that Mambo Italiano song.  Oh wait, this song WAS played during our meal on 3.20.09.  I'm sure it loops every day though.  Decor:  3.5 Stars  Fancier than Macaroni Grill and I should hope so as this is Vegas and a step above its sister restaurant.  The seating was vast and it could probably fit at least 5 bachelorette parties.  Oh yeaaahh...  bachelorette parties...   *droool*  There weren't too many people let alone bachelorette parties, but most patrons were enjoying the beautiful weather in their outdoor seating area.  Food:  3 Stars  The minestrone was ok.  It was a bit cheesy and the color seemed paler (not as tomato-red) and its taste was different than most minestrone soups I've had.    I had the Lobster Fettuccine.  There wasn't much lobster.  Italian Sausages were also few and a bit burnt.  The peas and artichokes gave it a nice balance.  The white wine cream sauce was really good but a little salty than I like my pasta sauces to be.  So this Little Italy Favorite is a mainstay in San Francisco fare?  I'm glad I had the chance to savor it in Vegas.  I'd come back.  I'd probably go someplace closer though, like Orange County and go all out Family Style.    P.S. - To the previous Yelpers, I agree that the food made me thirsty; however, this place isn't as salty as their cousin On The Border in Rancho Cucamonga.  P.P.S. - Update 3/26.  I just read an article in Yahoo Health today:  http://health.yahoo.com/experts/eatthis/26542/americas-unhealthiest-restaurants.  Chili's, On the Border, and Macaroni Grill - all owned by Maggiano's parent company, Brinker are on the hit list and the sodium count on their menu items aren't benefiting my pre-hypertension."							
3HO4MYYR1249OXLEYCWW0JNJL3X6U9	Shredded beef burrito was good though not enough heat. Service was good. Definitely should visit.							
3PIOQ99R7Y2HVIR6XTID2U95GTLNUZ	"Simple chain restaurant with family style feel.    I've been to Maggiano's a few times and found the food very consistent.  I would recommend grabbing a reservation in advance of going here as it gets very busy.  Rather than comment on all the dishes we had, I'll just generally say that everything was well cooked, flavorful, and something I would order again.  As for the service, it was also excellent.  The menu is affordable and the service is great.  Of course there are better restaurants (Lavo, Nove, etc.), but not in this price range."							
3TL87MO8CM52O0RVQR7Z324D1B6LFW	"Slow Slow Slow service.   The food was good for me, my husbands filets were tough so he did not like it.  Kids liked their food but waiting 45 for the main course was a big turn off for us."							
3B0MCRZMBRA46YVNWMWBWDR18RUPP1	So amazing! Probably the closest thing to an authentic Greek gyro i have had since I moved back from Greece a year ago. Kalo!!							
3MQY1YVHS306AXT7BJ3Y5GEJGDOB2G	So delicious! Fresh grilled chicken and yummy salad! Owner is very attractive too :) should be open on Sundays though!							
3RIHDBQ1NEE68E0MLTWE60VFHVAHMT	so f-ing good! came here for dinner with some friends. we were seated right away. service was great. the food was yummy. i had the lobster fetticine and that shit was the bomb! the ambiance of the restaurant was very nice too. very elegant. you didn't even feel like you were in vegas. best of all it was affordable and not as expensive as you would expect compared to other restaurants in vegas.							
3T2HW4QDUVN0KM6CASE8QNSF44YC9G	"SO GOOD  We came here after an extremely long day and everyone left stuffed and happy. They told us everything is made from scratch, so they will accommodate any substitutions.  We started with the Calamari Fritte and the Stuffed Mushrooms. I hate mushrooms, but everyone else said they were the best they'd ever had.   I had the Chef's Favorite Famous Rigatoni D (without mushrooms of course) and it was crazy good. Anything with caramelized onions is good by me. My bf got the Lobster Baked Tilapia and we were really amazed at the generous amount of lobster on top. He was in heaven! Our friend got the Gnocci and loved it, my parents both got Parmesan Crusted Tilapia and were going crazy for it.   I've done the Family Style dinner before and it's definitely worth it. The only reason we didn't do it this time is because we didn't have a fridge in our hotel room."							
3J5XXLQDHMRA4TNWK083P2DIPJ43VP	"So I came here with a bunch of friends as our first group meal for a bachelor party weekend on a Friday night. We were all starving to be honest and this place had been set up as our go to stop. We received a number of pre-ordered dishes family style that were already included in our costs so I am not sure what the breakdown was, but it was AYCE and we definitely enjoyed the grub.  We had about 30 guys and took over a gigantic table next to a bachelorette and her party and a bunch of normal patrons. We had multiple courses and the food came out hot and tasty and in portions big enough for our entire table to get enough to eat at once...  Pro Tip: Call ahead and get a reservation. A number of people had to wait quite a while in order to get seated who didnt.  The food was all decent to tasty and the chicken and pasta dish stuck out as the best to me. It had some type of a white (creme?) sauce with it. The dinner also included appetizers and dessert. It's a tremendous amount of food and the only way to go if you dont want to hit up the buffet's.    The one thing I will add is that the service is not exactly the best. It took several requests before anyone brought us water or drink refills (soda, tea, beer, etc). It was also a bit difficult to get additional bread n butter. It just seemed to take an inexorably long time.  Overall it was worth it and our service could have been affect by the sheer size of our group. It is hard to say for sure."							
3WGCNLZJKFOS099V6BUQVNSERSLD17	"So I heard this was the best Chinese place in Phoenix. I hope not.   PROS: The staff is efficient. They are on point from entry to exit.  The place is very large and can accommodate tons of guests. I went after the lunch rush and there were just a handful of people in there.  The tallest soda cups.   Quick Service. My food is was out in less than 5  minutes after ordering.   I ordered the Orange Chicken. It's always good to try the popular dish at the new place to see how they prepare it.  Cons: It did not look very appeasing to the eye. It sorta looked just slopped together. Presentation is key with me.  WAAAAAYYYY too saucey! The chicken and rice were drowned in the sauce. I could not even finish it.  Maybe I need to try another dish or maybe just order the sauce on the side next time, but I'm still looking for the best Chinese food in Phoenix."							
3XJOUITW8U7NY2P9DGKK1SI82Q1TQ1	"So i pass by maggianos every time I visit southcoast in CALI which is almost weekly but I had never tried their food.  So when we were in vegas for my birthday we decided to head their for our lunch before we headed back to Cali.   We ordered our meal after awhile because the server was being erratic and then after twenty minutes or so we got our appetizer.  After we recieved it they asked us to move to another table towards the middle and we had to carry our own food and dishes over.  Then after another twenty minutes or so we received our food.  Too bad when we said ""no marinera' on my besties pasta and confirmed that we are sorry but to please substitute and she glady said it was no problem it of course came out with marinera.  However it took so long in the first place for our food to arrive so my bestie stuck to it.  THEN what happened is unbelievable..they actually started VACUUMING right behind us.  Back and Forth Back and Forth with NO warning what-so-ever which I don't even know if it would have made it any better.  After 5-10 minutes...YES SERIOUSLY the couple behind us asked to get the check because they couldn't stand it.  After the whole ordeal our server comes out as if she just realized the vacuum had been on and asks if we want to move.... NO IDIOT THE DUST ALREADY FLEW UP AND LANDED SAFELY ON MY FOOD. I DONT WANT TO EAT NOW I WANT TO GET OUT...   apparently they had their carpet cleaned and they needed to vacuum the moisture out....As if that could not wait until another time????  what a dissappointment.  So I asked her for their card so I could leave corporate a comment.  I didn't get to it until a month or so later and they said it was too late to leave a comment but too bad I still did.  After my comment I didn't receive any notice that they received my comment.  I am NOT looking for free comps or anything of that nature I just want them to understand that is NOT what I expected in a restuarant...it reminded me of those annoying sweepers in cafeterias/fastfood joints.    This location needs HELP"							
3A3KKYU7P3XO54VBGSIE7352WJMMWX	"So I've been out biking all afternoon and it's still a gorgeous day so I want to sit outside somewhere and eat something. I stop at this little Gyros shop in an obscure corner of Papago Plaza for the sole reason that it has a great outdoor seating spot -wide, well shaded, far enough from the street and a decent view over Skysong with a bit of the Supes peaking through.  And the food is fantastic!! I had the chicken Pita, which was astoundingly tasty, with a great salad and it's $6.25? How is that possible? And the service (I think that was George?) couldn't have been better. And the place inside is clean and bright.   Nobody could ask for more."							
37OPIVELUUJ56DRXOQ69X90FNELAH2	"So impressed!! We were here for my husbands birthday dinner, and everything was amazing.  We ordered filet mignon and the lobster carbanara. Our food came to our table HOT. (I hate when it comes to you warm or semi warm. I don't want it sitting in a window.  We also tried the calamari. It was the best we have ever had. Our waiter Assad, was great. Our drinks always filled, and overall great service. JHe even brought my husband a small bday dessert.   Portions are huge! Food is fresh, prices are good!   We wiill be back!!"							
31HLTCK4BLBBY5ZKFFFN8W2RTO9GVA	So my bf and I decided to eat here while we were at the fashion show mall. He kept raving to me how good it was so I wanted to try it. And he was RIGHT!! It is absolutely delicious. It's fine dining so of course service was great as well.							
3EQPA8A374C2YRUVOIPTQF739RWJZH	"So my parents were in town visiting and my dad loves Italian food. We were on the strip and I remembered hearing about this place, so we decided to give it a try. This place definitely has some old world charm, it feels a bit like dining at your nonna's house. In typical strip fashion there were some people in prom style dresses and others in basketball shorts, I love Las Vegas! The place is huge and we were seated in a booth that felt a bit claustrophobic. We tried to maneuver the table a bit, but it was a tight fit even for me, and I am pretty small. Regardless, it was a bustling Saturday night and we were seated within a few minutes and our waiter promptly appeared at our table.  Of course we started with the bread and it was delicious. I always appreciate olive oil and balsamic with a warm and chewy piece of bread. After checking out the portion sizes on other tables, I opted for a Caprese salad, figuring I could scavenge off of everyone else's plates. The slices of tomato and mozzarella were quite large, I like mine to be a bit more dainty, but they actually had great flavor and it hit the spot for me. I usually add salt to my Caprese, but in this case it was perfectly seasoned. My husband ordered the Rigatoni D, which features chicken, mushrooms, and caramelized onions all tossed in a creamy marsala sauce. It was definitely delicious! I appreciated that the chicken had flavor on its own and each element really brought something to the dish. It was even better reheated the next day! My dad had the baked Ziti and it was also well done. It had a great tomato flavor with a hint of sausage. I stole a little plate and also reheated it the next day for dinner. My mom had the lasagna and it was pretty good. I feel like lasagne is a dish that everyone makes at home and isn't very difficult to make, and they had a pretty standard version.   I was very surprised with how well we ate and even more surprised to learn that this is a chain restaurant. It made my picky dad happy and I would definitely return. It is not the best Italian food in town, but not bad if you're in the mall or on the strip and want a good meal at a decent price."							
3IHWR4LC7DTRJK92XA4G1UVZX3ZI8Y	"so we wanted Chinese, and decided to eat at the restaurant. What awesome service. We started with the potstickers ($4.95). They were lightly pan fried. Perfectly chewy with a nice crisp on them. Wifey went with her go to dish, the amaaaaazing Singapore rice noodles with BBQ pork and Shrimp (8.95)  This dish is EASILY enough to feed three people. (yes, she brought most of it home) I went with the salt and pepper pork chops. If I could marry chinese food, this would be my bitch. Holy cow. Awesome thin cut pork chops breaded, salted and served with jalapenos and chives. I don't ever ever ever eat fried foods, but these were seriously one of the best chinese pork dishes ever. Overall, great great great. Super stoked that this place is right around the corner."							
3UV0D2KX1MZ6QSKAKZ8IHL22FPC4FN	"So, my dad said this Italian eatery in Vegas was one of the best Italian foods he has eaten before. Since my mom and I didn't really know what we wanted to eat for lunch, it was a why not kind of thing. We got there and was seated  within 5 mins, granted this was a lunch hour so i'm guessing there were fewer people there.   Personally, i didn't like our waiter. He sounded insincere. i know that they don't really care whether you've eaten there or not, or if the food it good or not, just act better.  We ordered the fried calamari for the appetizer; i really liked it. My mom ordered the shrimp and crab imperial; that was yummy. My dad ordered some lobster alfredo; that was also delicious. I ordered a steak bruschetta(sp?) and it was absolutely delightful! it was the right portion and i loved eating it. since i'm not a food expert, that's all i can give with the food. The blood orange italian soda tasted good too; it comes in a fancy bottle.  Overall, i much enjoyed this restaurant ^.^, but if i ever want to eat legit italian food, it would be at my friend's house."							
3IYI9285WSGPQYJLW45LFH6I099CJA	Solid 4.  I have been to three Maggiano's (2 in CA and now Vegas).  The one in Vegas is the best one.  This is my favorite place to eat Italian food.  The food is great.  They have large portions.  Service was quick and polite.  Always try to go to a Maggiano's on the off hours or make a reservation to avoid long waits.  My favorites are the chicken parm and garlic shrimp pasta.							
3V0TR1NRVAIBU1329JMQ3KRBI9YA4F	Solid place to grab a classic breakfast. Nice selection with seasonal choices. Had the Pumpkin Pancakes with some herbal tea.							
39WSF6KUV21IO7UW883LD1N7KFXEOP	"Some friends of ours brought us to this place a few days ago.  The food was amazing.  We ordered the Phoenix platter for four people, which gave a salad, appetizer, soup, and about four or five different meals....all of which, awesome.  The food was delicious and fast.  The prawn rolls were my favorite.  Looking forward to going back and trying other things.  My friends who brought us here told us that they have tried nearly everything on the menu and haven't had anything bad there....it's all been great."							
322ZSN9Z5G0G9X2BFJD7YPH36YJT4J	Some girl I know said she went to China Chili and it was the best Chinese food she's ever had. After she told me that I went to China Chili the next day. The menu is standard for a Chinese restaurant nothing special. We ordered some beef dish for our meal and a side of chow mein. The beef was chewy and the chow mein was bland. I do not understand why people love China Chili. I wouldn't recommend this restaurant to my worst enemy!							
3EQVJH0T401AL9Q6UQXQSEQ7B35HTT	"some of the best hummus i've had in a long time! the remodel (from the previous gyro restaurant) is gorgeous. no more of the ubiquitous blue & white ""greek"" theme. i also had a greek salad with chicken & it was delicious as well. i will go back for more."							
3J9L0X0VDF29YKCHRJE92HZIWKFW98	"Some places wow you with their style and exotic cuisine, others sneak up on you with a little more subtlety. Maggiano's was one of my favorite meals in Las Vegas, because they just made everything easy. First of all, being in a non-smoking restaurant was literally a breath of fresh air. We got to curl up in a cozy booth facing floor to ceiling windows so it was an entirely different vibe from most casino restaurants.   It is a chain, but it meant they offered a wide variety of reasonably priced options and our lunch entrees, Chicken Pesto Linguine and Chicken Francese ($11 - 13), were excellent. One of my favorite things to eat in Italy is a fresh arugula salad lightly tossed with oil, but it is hard to find in the U.S. I was thrilled when it came as a side to the Chicken Francese and it brought back so many wonderful memories.   From our arrival through the end of service, the staff was professional, prompt and courteous. Portion size was hearty, especially the pasta dish, so we even skipped dinner that night. Not the most exciting choice in town, but sometimes you just want a little comfort food and air, sweet, sweet fresh air."							
3QI9WAYOGQRT9KTA971WLI5V06C6ST	"Someone recommended this place and they were right. This is real Mexican food right in the middle of Scottsdale. We ordered the tilapia chicharron and the Tampiquena...they were both really good, the meat was tasty and juicy. The salsas and chips that they serve you in the beginning are to die for! ..great service and great environment. I went to get lunch but they told me that at night they have a DJ, we are coming back for sure!"							
3CVDZS288HGMUI9GQ38E3FJ21GXFMT	"Spent our one year anniversary lunch here while in Vegas.  We couldn't really decide where to go and were in the mood for Italian so we decided to give it a try.  We were seated immediately and our server was extremely nice and attentive with great recommendations.    We started with garlic bread - garlicky but not overwhelming.  It was good.  I had the chicken marsala, which I really enjoyed, the chicken was moist and the marsala sauce was just enough.  My boyfriend had the baked ziti and he really enjoyed the pasta as well - it was al dente with the right amount of sauce/sausage/cheese.    Overall, it was a good experience.  Will definitely go back again."							
32FESTC2NH6Y4EUF839ZMJFTHP8UCP	Spur of the moment decision to eat at maggiano's food was good not great and service lacked in every way horrible is being nice.  They had an excuse for everything. Do not recommend. Wait staff was not professional.							
3ZXV7Q5FJB49LWXPDEE00JEQ72TCF8	"Sticker. Sticker. Sticker.  Sticker shock when I saw the bill!  Thank goodness it wasn't my turn. Lol.   Everything was good. It's in a decent location, to where they can change you premium solely for location, but it's definitely a delight.   Everything was delicious. The service was exceptional.   Would definitely dine again."							
3MA5N0ATTCRTFGV8VG5YSQDY7ERWK2	"Stopped by for happy hour - food was good (not remarkable, but yummy) however we were bowled over by the service.  Nicole waited on us and she was fantastic.  Really made our experience much nicer."							
3E6L1VR4XW2K5FOO3N1XEJMGBGIF6J	"Stopped by for lunch, and wasn't disappointed.  I got the chicken piccata (loved it!) and hubby got the lobster carbonara (fantastic!).  Bread was nice & fresh, all soft & yummy inside the crispy exterior, but the side salads were rather boring.  Will definitely go there again."							
3FJ2RVH25ZMNM4EADZP2EAJTSDL924	"Stopped by late one night and picked up a pizza for takeout.  Although it seemed to be a little pricey, it was an excellent pizza.  Tasty thin crust, delicious pizza sauce and was very generously topped with mushroom (big fresh slices) and pepperoni.  So good."							
3HKIF5DF6YDD1YMHCEARGEDU2WP9GM	"Stopped in for a Sunday Breakfast before a baseball spring training game. I have to admit that this IHOP was a bit smaller then the ones i have been too, but they did a great job, there was one young girl in the front that was a bit silly, but everybody else was fine. Service was quick and efficient. I understand its like any other IHOP, but they do a good job with their space and the quantity that arrives to eat there.   So if your in the area and need some food in your system, stop in."							
308KJXFUJRMVBMISOKNYBS33Y8FTAU	Stopped in for dinner during Presidents Day weekend and while very crowded and some delay the food came out hot and delicious. Still a great casual spot on the strip!							
3O4VWC1GEWM1DYN23BUKME2OUWX3J4	tapas hecha con amor para los mejores paladares autentica comida regional espanola.donde puerdes ir con tu familia y amigos ambiente agradables muy bueno.							
378G7J1SJLEQTG3YZUUVUV0TNHVWEI	"Tasty food, but waaaaaaaaaaaaay to much salt.  We got there around 730pm and were told to wait 30-40 min for a table.  They gave us a buzzer, so we went and sat next door.  After about 45 min, we went up to the counter and asked how much longer our table would be.  The hostess checked their list and looked a little flustered... as if our name magically disappeared.  She immediately seated us.  Our server was pretty good at first.  I got the ""famous"" rigatoni D, while my bf got the beef cannelloni.  Both our dishes were very very salty.  For the beef cannelloni, they were very generous with the beef, very sparse on the pasta, and the carrots were undercooked and very crunchy.  My rigatoni was a very big portion, but so salty I ended up drinking all my water for half the dish.    This brings me to my second qualm...  once we got our dishes, our server went MIA.  It seemed like everyone around us with bigger parties had very good service, while we waited and waited for him to even acknowledge us.  We had to ask for water and even then it took 5 min to get it.    Overall, I'd say the restaurant was overpriced (we ended up spending $45 on just those two entrees) and overhyped.  Would I eat here again?  Maybe if someone were treating... and only if I have a full glass of water!"							
3PR3LXCWSFFONKH71OAV40DP5ML9XE	"Temporal cooking at its best! I can't remember how many times I've ordered and the food was out before the water was... you definitely get a LOT of food for the price, and everything I have tried has been awesome."							
3RWSQDNYL92GO8HZ4G418PZT4FLFFM	"Terrible customer service.  We called a month in advance to make Thanksgiving reservations.  We flew in from Philly and flew my brother in...for his birthday....from L.A.  When we got to Vegas, we called to move the reservation an hour and a half later.    No problem, the girl told us...and she confirmed they knew we were celebrating a birthday AND Thanksgiving.  We arrived only to learn they had closed at 8, one hour BEFORE we were supposed to be there.  I confirmed the time I had called, and they confirmed that a note was in our reservation.  Nevertheless, although the restaurant was PACKED, they refused to seat us. They offered a weak apology...not even a free drink....and our Thanksgiving was ruined.  Terrible, terrible customer service."							
3NOEP8XAU4I9F7XEID6SQQD4AQ3PXP	Terrible food quality and very disorganized. Very disappointing.							
3HJ1EVZS2OZIBM6FBG3TO5OF4DQR3J	"Terrible hostesses. I walked in at 5:30 abd asked how long the wait for 3 people was. I was told no wait. I said my people will be here at six can I put my name in a list, knowing it would get busy.  St sux I was told the wait was an hour.  Take your seats immediately even if your party is not there yet.   Customer service is non existent they count on the one shot tourist trade..  After some discussion the manager Mike M. Made things right..  hopefully his staff will improve under his tutelage."							
3G4VVJO6PZW3V7Y7JUR30W52EHOKPV	"Terrible service. Went on Super Bowl night and after being seated we waited for 15 minutes without  even one server coming to our table to greet us much less take our order. We saw 5 servers watching the game instead of doing their job so we left. On the way out we spoke to the  hostess about the problem. She apologized, but they need to do a better job."							
3XH7ZM9YX2A4QOVVSP43FIR14509RI	"TGI  friday's One of my favorite places for a casual meal in a bar atmosphere! Mostly a fun place with mostly bar food. they're always busy so I give waiters a break if they take extra minutes for this or that. The food is always good I have tried almost everything on the menu and enjoyed every bite of it. This time I had the sirloin and baby back ribs and it was delicious. The desserts are out of this world and prices are down to earth. This is not a fast food restaurant, slow down and enjoy life! Try this place you'll enjoy it. Thank God I did."							
3N2YPY1GI6EDER3T9KPZ8THFG8TVE7	TGI always good menu! The service was good and they have buckets of beer 5 for $10 and $5 margaritas. That is an awesome deal for any casino!!!							
3SR6AEG6W5962VP04WKP0VIMQ5NHYI	"TGI Fridays was on my radar as soon as the Las Vegas Wranglers kicked Colorados A*% @ the CMYE Hockey party. GO WRANGLERS..WOO HOO!   Just having stadium nachos and three beers during a 3 hour game was definitely, not the end of my dinner plans for the night. My wife and I rushed over as soon as the game ended and sat in the bar. Our server was Ricky. He's a low talker for sure, but very nice, and knew what to say and when to say it. Fridays is just like every other commercialized restaurant around the universe. Old records, pictures, random rowing oars hanging on the walls, and constant striped patterns everywhere you look (probably even on the toilet seat covers). But they do have one thing that I was super stoked to see. They have a bell that you are supposed to ring if you received excellent service. Now, when I see a bell, all I want to do is ring it.....hard! I was hoping Ricky, would be killer in the service game, so I could ring that bell. Fingers were crossed.  To start out, my wife really wanted the ""Loaded Potato Skins""(refer to pic), which I have never had before, anywhere. So I figured, alright, I'm down. They weren't exactly ""Loaded"", or very good. Bacon, yes, is always good on everything, BUT.. the thing they go on still has to have flavor! It can't just be some semi-soggy, piece of cardboard. Anyways, no bueno on the skins.   For our entrees, we both ordered the ""Jack Daniels Chicken Sandwich""(refer to pic). The sandwich looked good, and came with (over)seasoned fries. The sandwich alone was pretty bad, but when you drizzle the delicious Jack Daniels BBQ sauce all over, it becomes pretty tasty! Not amazing by any means, but good. The fries that came with were just way over seasoned. They were so salty, I found myself shaking each one, trying to knock off all the seasoning, before attempting to eat them. During this ongoing battle with my food, Ricky brought both of us refills, made some small chat, and ended with a smile. I'm not big on complaining about food, and figured it wasn't that big of a deal at the time.   For dessert we had the Chocolate Caramel, and Pecan Explosion (forgot the name, but thought this sounded awesome)(refer to pic). This dessert was actually very good. It put a nice, big smile on our face's. The chocolate brownie was topped with vanilla ice cream, and chopped pecans. Very moist brownie, covered in rich, flowing chocolate sauce. Nomnom.  Before we left, I had to ring that bell. Ricky was a good server, and I went for the bell. Let me tell you..., it felt so good to ring that bell, I would go back just for that feeling again. All-in-all, bell ringing is amazing and everyone should have a good bell ring daily. Head to Fridays for your bell fix today."							
3HKIF5DF6YDD1YMHCEARGEDU2WQ9GN	"Thank you David and Lisa S for introducing us to China Chli this past Friday night!  We're always on the lookout for good Chinese in the Valley, and now we have another option (not too far from home) with China Chili.  I didn't expect CC to be such a large restaurant, and they were hopping to boot!  The atmosphere was welcoming - casual and old school; I especially love the disco ball in the main dining room.  The servers are serious and efficient, perhaps because they don't speak much English, but with so many customers, it works out fine... I imagine most people are there for the food anyways.  So without further adieu, here's what we ordered for our family-style dinner:  -Pot Stickers (I didn't have these but everyone else did and enjoyed them!) -Sizzling Rice Soup -Honey Walnut Prawns -Sichuan Style String Beans (we ordered with no pork and extra spicy thanks to a tip I found in Julie P's yelp review) -House Chow Fun Noodles -One of their house special steak dishes (I think it was Sizzling Black Pepper Beef in a dark sauce).  Yes, I know, that's a lot of food for four people but we did have plenty of leftovers and I liked everything that I ate!  Thank you -  (Xixi) - China Chili, David and Lisa, for a memorable meal!  I look forward to returning soon to try some of my other Chinese favorites!"							
3MXX6RQ9EVLIH594Y24NTFG6HVZ4PQ	"Thanksgiving, ruined ! Dont' ever, EVER, think about going here for Thanksgiving!  First of all, the food was terrible. Over salted. Just awful.  Second they ran out of food, or perhaps do not know how to plan well.  Third, they ran TWO HOURS late for our confirmed reservation! Ridiculous- ran out of proscuitto for their own Maggiano's salad!  They obviously were running low on food by the time we were seated. (5:15 reservation, seated at 7:15!) For seven adults, they place two ice cream scoops of mashed potatoes on a small plate in the center of the table-for seven people!  Then the turkey platter looked like  a sad plate of leftovers-and had one little mound of stuffing- which was gone after it was passed to the second person. We kept thinking that was decoration, and they would bring some in a bowl (aka family style). Same for the ham platter, one little scoop of sweet potatoes for seven adults!  The pasta course however, was abundant --apparently the only thing they know how to cook.  They brought two big bowls of pasta for side dishes. Everything was horribly over salted!  The gravy -also they must have been running out of...was a tiny little coffee cup sized dish of milky white looking blah gravy??   I cannot repeat enough it was HORRIBLE.  Two ten year olds could pull together a better turkey dinner.   They have a lot of nerve charging $40 per person!"							
30UZJB2POHST6Z8HE9QQL4JJCV235I	"The ambiance was my favorite part.  We made reservations around 6:30 pm on Saturday.  The earliest seating was at 9:15 pm.  We arrived at the fashion show mall, parked, and wondered our way out front to the entrance of Maggiano's.  I always love the atmosphere in these kind of places.  I'm not a big fan of Italian food, so don't read too much into my comments about the food.  The Calamari Fritte was a bit greasy with too much oil, but was overall pretty good.  The marinara dipping sauce was superb.  We also had stuffed mushrooms, which were really good.  They were stuffed with spinach and topped with seasoned bread crumbs and served in a garlic white wine sauce.  My fiance and I shared a bowl of Linguine di Mare.  It had lobster, shrimp, clams, & mussels with noodles in a spicy lobster tomato broth.  It was pretty good.  Lots of meat.  Very filling.  A man with a guitar and another man with an accordion serenaded us with a romantic Italian song.  Simply romantic.  We had nice seats facing Las Vegas Boulevard.  We lingered a while after paying the bill, but the server stopped refilling our water.  This bothered me a little.  I was unusually thirsty and could not seem to get enough.  The bill was almost $60.  We had to take an alternate route back to the car because The Fashion Show Mall was closed.  I enjoyed this experience and would go again, but would prefer some place else because I'm not a big fan of Italian food."							
371DNNCG44IHSYPDRM3KF1X88KFT8Q	"The atmosphere is alright, and the food is good. Nothing special. But the service is exceptionally terrible. I stopped ""giving it another try"" because I just couldn't take it anymore. It amazes me that a place can consistently have bad service in Las Vegas. No thank you."							
3SR6AEG6W5962VP04WKP0VIMQ5OHYJ	"The atmosphere is great, the food and wine were very good, and we got a great server as well! Was able to make an online reservation through Open Table for five people 30 minutes ahead of time on a Friday evening, which was awesome."							
3VW0145YLYS2ZKVC9TZZIDBUUNEJM0	"The atmosphere is very nice and quite comfortable. That's the good part of our visit to Toros. I found the food lacking any seasoning or taste. Has the chief heard of salt or pepper. Portions are very small, we ordered the braised rib we got one piece which was about 3 inches by 3 inches over mashed potatoes cost $8. I understand small plates but most tapas restaurants plates are at least large enough for 2 people to share. At best the food is bland  and not worth the prices they charge. I certainly hope they rework the food. I don't mind paying more for really good food, but I do mind being overcharged for poor food. I don't normally compare one restaurant to another since each should be able to stand on their own but honestly FireFly is hands down so much better."							
39TX062QX1428ISRKF9LDNA35UCX3M	"The Bartender was rude and if I wasn't with my family I would have thrown my drink in his face. Actually I wanted to do a lot more, but i figured a true review would hurt them most.  DONT GO!"							
3X2LT8FDHWY9KFT7MR8V2L47CEY8WW	The best Italian family style restaurant!							
3MJ9GGZYO3M1RNOF5532A5UDYV3A2K	"The best Italian food I have ever had from a chain restaurant!  If you are staying in Vegas, get out of your hotel and take a walk to Maggiano's.  You will need the walk back to your hotel to help digest the fantastic meal you just ate.  I have eaten at Maggiano's a number of times around the country and now I find myself seeking them out when I travel.  If you like calamari you must try theirs.  I think my favorite dish so far is Mom's Lasagna.  Be sure to save room for the Tiramisu or Pound Cake with Caramelized Bananas.  They also have a very good wine list."							
3XDJY5RK5S1V9AH0FO3H3L35PCR4UM	"The best Italian food I've had in Vegas and the best bruschetta I've ever had anywhere (admittedly I've not yet actually been to Italy though).  The menu options were original and everything we ordered was both extraordinarily flavorful and fresh.  We were there for lunch and the prices were a steal (for example, the $6 bruschetta was the size of a meal in itself and the wine by the glass was also reasonable by Vegas standards).    Our waiter was nothing special, but we wanted for nothing.  And while the dining experience for me is usually diminished when dining in a mall (even a Vegas mall), I found that the location was actually quite nice and lended itself to great views of the strip.  I would have liked to have tried the desserts but I hardly could finish my meal because of the large portions--I guess that means I'll have to go back."							
3KL228NDMV2XIU58GB1G6NRADQ1KGR	The best Italian in town!!!							
3UQVX1UPFSX5QAQXD369LZI0P9R20L	"The best meal In Vegas. A fun and affordable choice.  They have never disappointed us and we'll keep coming back. The veal is the way to go, and don't be in a rush for a table."							
3S8APUMBJXZQBR5JZEI5PZ88PHSFB3	"The clam chowder was kinda gross. But the lobster ravioli was delicious. The shrimp cocktail was pretty good, but its half price if u sit in the bar. The honey mustard chicken sandwich was gross. I couldnt even finish it, I had to leave and order something else in the food court. Waste of $. But I do have to say the angel hair pasta w/ grilled chicken and tomato & fresh basil was good. That I would order again. Just be careful what you order. Don't order something out of the ordinary. Who knows how it might turn out.  PS the margaritas were WAY too sweet."							
3ZFRE2BDQ9U3TBZK5M4UHOFIKPAXZI	"The enigmatic Fred may have gone, the name on the door may have changed, but underneath the express makeover the place very much remains The Little Inn, bar the name.  Sadly, despite the new lady owner being perfectly pleasant, she's not yet a patch on the local legend that was Fred. He's now off to sunnier climes, and his perfect mix of charisma, erratic behaviour, and typical French befuddlement at the peculiarities of life in the UK, will be sorely missed.  Fingers crossed the new tenant can one day take up a place in EH8 folklore."							
34OWYT6U3WXRXPSC22AU1QQAH9I9IF	"The food and service was great. Our server, Rafael, was so helpful. He made several suggestions that helped us to decide what to order without breaking the bank or over stuffing ourselves.  We reserved online, got there a bit early and got seated within a couple of minutes.  Rafael explained that anything and everything on the menu could be modified to our desire - different noodle, sauce, substitution of an ingredient, etc. So we ordered the seafood linguine and substituted shrimp for mussels. Came out totally delicious. Appetizers were $4 until 6:30pm so we ordered italian sausage flatbread. Delicious! We were too full for dessert but wanted a tasted of the Tiramisu - our favorited. Rafael suggested the sampler Tiramisu for a fraction of the regular price. We went for it and were surprised by the still good sized portion. Again it was perfect.  Rafael also gave us suggestions for tours and shows.  Our experience was fantastic. We couldn't stop talking about it to our family and will try Maggiano's in San Jose"							
3XEIP58NL038THIVR3166UKVDG1ZLZ	"The food at Maggianos is absolutely superb. Knowing that Las Vegas has a rep for the ultra high end, Maggianos was the best I had.  The profiterole rolls were absolutely divine and the setting a little reminiscent of pastis in New York."							
3Z8UJEJOCZTC7MATHZ37XKOLYRL399	"The food here is always plentiful, tasty, and the service always sublime. If I had to pick a chain of Italian, it's definitely Maggiano's!"							
33J5JKFMK6EIZLRFY1ETJFEA8RP3QV	The food here is really good. They somehow make green beans and tofu delicious. Miracles never ends.   Their orange chicken is the best I've ever had (no hint of that nasty ketchup flavor you get a some places) and the sizzling rice soup...there are no words.							
3J6BHNX0U983SMMU3FEBW707E2NNK2	"The food is absolutely amazing! Our waiter was awesome but the hostesses working tonight are horrible. No energy, no smiles, and they were very rude. They made me feel uncomfortable and I'm sure anyone else would feel the same. Like I understand you may not be working but you're making money so slap on a smile and fake it! These two girls would never survive where I work."							
3NCN4N1H1GX2ZJI0X21IX4HHR8FBN7	The food is always been amazing there and they have great deal When my wife wants to go out to breakfast that is where we go  The omelettes are the best							
3OID399FXGNJQO33DA9BKPW8S24FDA	"The food is decent and it's open very late, 2AM weekdays, 3am on weekends.  Since many of the restaurants in Vegas aren't open late at night, it's a very reliable standby to get some decent food late at night.  The Southwestern Mahi Mahi  or Shrimp Key West is great if you want something light, as many of the dishes tend to be on the heavy side, with alfredo-type sauces or cheese. I've also had their California Club (has avocado in it, very good) and one of the steaks (can't remember which one, but it was good).  They have a ton of different drinks, but if you don't drink alcohol, try the cherry limeade slush, very yummy & refreshing."							
3SR6AEG6W5962VP04WKP0VIMQ5NYHZ	"The food is delicious, the atmosphere is fun and the service is fantastic! Already been back!"							
3PUOXASB57JDSFHM26YG1LT0DMK9ZC	"The food is garbage; worse than Olive Garden yet similar to their variety.  Our waiter performed the functions of all the floor duties while the floor managers stood still, doing nothing; that made our entire dinner party very uncomfortable to see how much stress the waiting staff were under.  I would never recommend this establishment to any of my friends or family.  Is this representative of typical ""Strip"" food?"							
3OND0WXMHWV8WQ894V8VTSQ68TJEH1	The food is not that good. Nor is the sangria. Firefly has this place beat I'm sorry to say. Good try guys but up your game.							
38Z7YZ2SB3IXPO9YJ4LGNLGZR9LQIH	The food is really good I had the rigatoni D and Chicken picatta it was DELICIOUS. The reason for the 3 stars was the service the waiter was trying really hard but they were super busy it was just to much for him or anyone. But worth a try just make sure to have a reservation upon check in oh and the view is amazing							
3UV0D2KX1MZ6QSKAKZ8IHL22FPBF4X	"The food was good...maybe just a little salty, but I've come to expect that from large chains.  and our service was good.  But seated next to us was a group of four 20-something men, three of whom were wearing ""wife-beater"" tank tops.  It was really disgusting.  I don't expect suits and ties...and I guess these days in Las Vegas even a collared shirt is asking for too much.  But wife-beaters?!  It was gross.  I find it hard to believe that maggiano's doesn't have some minimum dress standards.  I'll probably go back again one of these days, but if I see that again, I'll leave."							
3VEI3XUCZRDPIBB29E0018RG99IPRT	The food was great.  The wait staff was impeccable.  My favorite part of the meal is the hunk of Parmesan cheese they give you.  yummy!  I also enjoyed the grappa they hand you at the end of the evening.							
341YLJU21IFGX57DHTVFR3IWB37I2V	"The food was great. But even for tapas, too small."							
3LB1BGHFL2CW74GV4Q1EEELA1ZIYT9	"The food was legit.  I think this place is a sleeping giant, but they are not quite ready for a busy show.  Being very picky, the CRUZ margaritas were a bit pricey shrink the glass option.  I like less mix and more tequilla.  Other than that, it is good food.  The green salsa was interesting as I could not distinguish what type of cheese was added.  Hoping queso fresco, but probably velvetta."							
3R5OYNIC2CP2YQOUD35V1NSYXUFTPA	The food was so delicious and I love the family style dinning!  The stuffed mushrooms and the alfredo sauce is so AMAZING also the cheesecake is not too shabby either!!!							
3NRZ1LDP7WMYK2XTJVUDNBTFIQ1PZM	"The hubs and I ate here for lunch on Friday and was pleasantly surprised. It's a sister property to John Cutter, which we don't think of as impressive since the service always sucks. That's another review though.   We started off with one of their signature cocktails, I had the cranberry fizz and he had the bloody Caesar. Although the drinks were pricey, they weren't watered down or tiny. The first thing that came out was their bread, and honestly it was the best bread I had at a restaurant in a long time: super rustic and crusty, served with some sort of aoili. The Manchego cheese plate was really good too. Stuffed Piquillo peppers, just ok. Garlic shrimp: well cooked, but I expected a little more flavor and punch. Meatballs: succulent and flavorful. I was slightly put off by the continuous use of red sauce, though.   I love the decor of this place and it certainly helps that it's a short walking distance to our house. I really hope that it does well so the neighborhood has more options besides John Cutter."							
35U0MRQMUJNZQIGI3YSVD5BTKA0OV5	"The Location is perfect to travelers and night view from the window seats is wonderful. Average food quality is good, but some sea food menu, such as a  Linguini di Mare are extremely salty. I could not eat at all. However stuffed mushroom is the best!! I also like their happy hour drink menu. (3-6PM)"							
3VMV5CHJZ8VWLDVVAKF87EE6W3STG6	"The moment we got to Vegas last weekend, my friend insisted we go to this place.  I really wasn't in the mood for Italian food but the group wanted it, so I was out of luck.  After a rather long wait for a non-buffet restaurant (20-25 min), we were seated.  We got the insalata caprese (although they didn't call it that), and the spinach and feta raviolio and manicotti and finished with the creme brulee.  The portions are rather large, so with a guy and 3 girls, the above menu was enough.  The prices were very fair, especially considering it was Vegas and that it was considered a very good restaurant.  The wine selection was decent.  If you're not in the mood to go bankrupt at Nobu, Lupo, or Postrio, go to Maggiano's for some very reasonable and altogether excellent Italian food in a great setting."							
3KI0JD2ZU1Y7QM9IL43LQR9ZDSZ767	The only Maggiano's that has awesome customer service and YUMMY FOOD. One of the smallest I've been to. They do have rooms if you want an event done there. You can only have a small wedding reception up to 60 people no more then that. It's located at The Fashion Mall at the very end of the place. They do have a outside patio. It is a very romantic place with the view of The Strip. The food is so much better the The Olive Garden more authenic in you're face. The food stick to you're ribs. You'll never leave hungry.     F.Y.I This location where you order a glass of wine. They put the wine in a smaller bottle. You pour what you want in the wine glass. But there is still some more I would say 1/4 left in the small bottle you get more for you're money that way.							
3EHVO81VN519CPEXS7DGM87CJKFH1L	"The orange chicken is very popular with my coworkers. In fact, some would eat there everyday if they could. I think their food is mediocre at best although they give very large portions and their service is very, very fast."							
3ZXNP4Z39R1P97CP889NFARW3NNL7S	"The pasta for the price at Maggiano's just can't be beat!  I went with my Mom and her sister and my bf (Chris L.) last week while in Vegas.  I shared the gnocchi and meat lasagna with Chris L. and my Mom and aunt shared the corn pasta with shrimp.  The corn pasta was a must for them because they are both on a gluten-free diet so regular wheat pasta just doesn't cut it.  I love that a serious Italian restaurant cares about the wheat-free side of life and offers wheat-free options.  I also love that a serious Italian restaurant can taste this good and not break the bank.  The wine list is great and the desserts were pretty good--I got the profiterole with ice cream and chocolate sauce and the dessert would've been divine if it weren't for the profiterole....  The two baby boomers at the table each got the (GF) creme brulee and loved it.  So, for what Maggiano's is, I'm giving it 5 stars.  It certainly beats the other ""cheap"" food of Vegas and the price is so much better than the expensive restaurants there.  That's a win-win in my book."							
3D06DR5225ZRYRS8FNMMPE8B40KMAN	The portobello ravioli was delicious an we also enjoyed the house rigatoni! Food and service was wonderful. If you are heading this way for dinner I would suggest making a reservation.							
3UYRNV2KITFJXLKTUQH862RGJ2TN8J	The prime rib loft should take a lesson frim these guys! Busy Monday night these guys rocked! Got me seated n the bar server was very busy food was hot beer cold not rushed and felt like I was at hone. It kinda stunks eatung alone but my server took great care of me! comort food and a couple of beers!!							
3JTPR5MTZSSZ2XGOZFIP2Q0LNHOK5A	"The purpose of our visit to Maggiano's was to carb-load the night before the Las Vegas marathon (which two of our party were actually running, the other two were there to support the runners.  And the carb loading!).  We were looking for somewhere close to Treasure Island at a reasonable price, and Maggiano's fit the bill. We made reservations through Open Table and were seated at our scheduled time.  The inside of the restaurant was quite nice but the tables are soooooo close together, I kept bumping into the guy behind me.  There was a large party of obnoxious loud people, but this tends to be the case at a lot of places in Vegas.  We split the bruschetta as an appetizer, and while it was delicious, for the price I was expecting a bit more.  However, they made up for portion sizes with the entrees!  My eggplant parmesam was posetively massive, but still elegantly served which I appreciated.  Another in our party had the chicken tortelloni's and the two others had the gnocchi.  Honestly, mine was pretty good but I liked everyone else's selections better.  Maybe I just chose something I wasn't in the mood for.  The bill was reasonable for Vegas and the meal served its primary purpose.  However, in comparison to alot of other places, it was just okay, and I wouldn't add it to my ""must visit while in Vegas"" list."							
3OPLMF3EU53ECS4COFQCB7DM32SNL5	"The rave reviews surprise me.  Saltiest food ever.  I could barely eat the eggplant parm, which is usually a favorite of mine.  I was thirsty for an entire day after...I thought I was going to need an IV to replenish my fluids!"							
3TLFH2L6Y9466JNOB5UJ5AK5MKNT2N	The Salt and Pepper flounder is amazing.  The egg drop soup is amazing as well.							
3S8APUMBJXZQBR5JZEI5PZ88PHTFB4	The service and food was excellent!  I was a concierge here in Las Vegas before and have eaten at many fine establishments and I would say that this one is a new addition to the top of my list.  Great classic Italian and a wonderful view of the strip.  We will definitely be returning.							
3YKP7CX6G2VDWYQDHVKT17VRRTA7BS	"The service here is awful. It took us an hour to be sat. We never it bread, it felt like a very uncaring environment. The food might be good but I am not sure because it is taking so long to get served that I might die of starvation first. I have been waiting so long that I have time to write all this. Also stingy with the bread and balsamic."							
35NNO802AVCCMRW63CTZJRLUMYYNIR	The service is amazing as well as the food. Everything I have tried so far has been perfected in taste and presentation.							
3AXFSPQOYQEWTA3VN6VMNNRLXM2JFT	"The service is good, very attentive employees.. The decor is pretty modern and pleasant.. However, the food is not that good.. I tried the stuffed piquillo peppers, which were pretty decent. The croquetas were pretty soft and not very tasty. The safron chicken was terrible and the bacon wrapped dates were just ok. The best thing we tried was the gazpacho, good portion, good price and there was a lot of meat on it! They also have a happy hour menu, 4-7 and 11-2 am. Drinks and some tapas items have a good price but truly the food is not that tasty that is not even worth it."							
3TUOHPJXYHDZZGUFUZKNIKL03N7WXS	"The service was exceptional and the food was OUTSTANDING...I always try and eat here when I am in Vegas...FYI-I am a VERY picky eater yet they always have something I like and they are ALWAYS willing to make whatever I like if it is not on the menu!! Will go again when I am back in town!  PS-I booked my reservation online while I was sitting at the LV Speed Way watching drag races...such an easy, and perfect thing to do..they had my table ready and waiting for my dad and I =)"							
39TX062QX1428ISRKF9LDNA35UC3XS	"The service was okay, had to ask the waiter for a refill on water after waiting nearly 10 minutes. The calamari was soggy but the portion was large. The tomato and basil soup was eh, but the Taylor Street Baked Ziti wasn't bad."							
3S1WOPCJFG94NW3ZSVBG556LLLNJEB	"The service was way better than the food until a large party came in, then the waiter couldn't handle the 3 tables he had. The drinks, (which was a Washington Apple) was served in a extra large shot glass instead of a martini glass. Worst of all, it tasted like cranberry with a squirt of Crown!  Last Friday's for me!"							
3FTID4TN8LE8OR8QVHZNSNBT7MWYL6	"The staff is super friendly and helpful. The food is great and out quickly. Coffee is always hot & tasty! This is our go-to breakfast spot! Plus you can sub almost anything, including egg whites, for no extra charge. They're very accommodating, especially for those of us who have to eat gluten free. So happy we found First Watch!"							
307L9TDWJY8XWOENI9MCFLJ53G1N3R	The Staff is super friendly.  The machine are horrible.  Have a drink and run because you can't win!!							
3G3AJKPCXL8CQJ15PP06669IL01Y4D	"The tapas were all good, nothing really wowed us, we did try their tequila rice pudding and loved that they sugar carmelize the top like a creme brulee.  What takes this to 4 stars is the service.  We, like many reviews went with a Groupon, unfortunately during happy hour, I asked to speak to the manager and he agreed to put in our order after happy hour ended in the computer so we could use the Groupon.  That was A1 customer service.  After that experience we will return!  Thank you."							
3HUR21WDDU53OLPF902B3H6GEV6XYR	"The whole service was awful! We got seated and it took about 15 min to get our drinks ordered, then they had the dishwasher, chef, waiters and the manager all taking orders. When the food was delivered about 30 min later one of our orders was wrong and the other was burnt also the table next to us had the same issue. And in the end when we went to pay they didn't have change so they asked myself if I had change for a dollar and when I said no the poor waitress had to use her own tips to give out change to the customers! Never again will I go there"							
37SDSEDIN9IGJED4P3JA9VEDG1P18Q	"the yards here are cheaper compared to that of the strip's.  but getting the yard to the strip can be rather tricky.  Specialty: American  Recommendations for first timers: Jack  Service: 8/10 Variety: 8/10, Parking: 9/10   marc out."							
3CMIQF80GN6HW4EXH3CRQIQUIIR6Q4	"Their sirloin tips are to die for - the best value tasty 'fast food dine in' meal to be had across this great country.  For the most part, the staff are excellent and the restrooms clean.     We've been travelling the USA for 2 months, repeating our holiday of last year. Been coming to the US since '78 and had never been to IHOP until the last trip. I regret not trying the place decades ago, now I know what I have been 'passing up' - they leave the other fast food joints for dead."							
35XW21VSVGUBS5WHWB7YA1NSQ11LSG	"There is no other Italian place (in my opinion) in Las Vegas.  I have been coming here for years every time I come to Vegas.  The only way to do it is family style - you get so much food, and they take such good care of you.  The only problem I have is I eat to much - every time I go and the rest of the night is miserable ... I never learn!! hahah"							
32PT7WK7DMVOACNATF89JG7BPCZD3Z	"There may be other breakfast places that are more unique, have better individual menu items, or are more compelling for one reason or another. But over the years, this place has consistently provided great healthy meals and excellent, fast, friendly service. I have never had a bad experience here and have always left wondering why I don't come back here more often. Then I go and try some new trendy breakfast joint, only to realize I would have been better off coming back to First Watch instead. My personal favorite dish is the Chickichanga, but I've eaten half the stuff on the menu and it's all been really good. And I particularly enjoy the fact that no matter what I eat there, I never feel like I just ingested 9lbs of cheese and grease when I'm done. It's all light and healthy and fantastic."							
3DTJ4WT8BDVUNB83AHE2TZUB4JZZEB	"There's a Maggiano's in my hometown of San Jose. Strangely enough, I have never been to that place. So this was my first time ever at Maggiano's! Whoa.  We pretty much hit the jackpot with parking. The underground lot of the Fashion Show mall has several entrances, and although we entered from the south end of the mall, we found our way to the northeast corner (which was actually near an exit) and found a perfect, surprisingly non-wheelchair parking space very close to the elevator that takes you directly to the back of Maggiano's.  After walking through to the host desk at the front, we got seated fairly quickly. It was a busy lunch hour, but not absolutely jampacked. We were seated by a window, thankfully, and we got to see some of the Wynn and Palazzo. I had a blast watching the Wynn divider move up and down the LED screen. Who needs a TV?  I somewhat surprised myself for asking for coffee. I was dead tired from accumulate sleep debt this week, so it was worth every penny of the $2.95. Our server was funny though. He took care to turn the saucer such that the spoon and coffee mug handle were angled to my left, even though it's kinda assumed that most people (including yours truly) are right-handed.  I have a lot of love for the Baked Eggplant Parmesan. So does my mom. She ordered it (and saved the leftovers for a special someone) along with the stuffed mushroom appetizers. My aunt went with the Linguini and Clams with white clam sauce, and I had the Veal Parmesan.  Just like in most Italian restaurants, we got started off with complimentary bread with olive oil / vinegar dipping sauce. Nice crust on the outside and soft absorbent inside. What more do you want?  The mushrooms came out first of the orders, and they were delicious. Couldn't care less that basically bread crumbs and fungus (with spinach and garlic). According to my mom, the version she knows from San Jose uses a higher number of smaller mushrooms. I guess you gotta go big in Vegas though, and I didn't mind fork-and-knifing it. I thought that the parmesan cheese available table-side did enhance the flavor, which some might view as a shortcoming.  I sampled some linguini too. It's pretty good, although the clam-to-noodle ratio reminds me strongly of ramen, in a not-that-appealing way. I like to have more of a balance of protein and starch.  My veal was nicely pounded, breaded, and fried and was sufficiently tender as far as that goes. The melted provolone and marinara sauce and the accompanying spaghetti were all great complements. I just realized that I didn't dust off my leftover veal with parmesan before leaving, which makes me a bit sad.  Overall, it was good, solid Italian food. One of the best parts, really, was the view, which strongly correlates with the obvious Las Vegas Strip price markups. It's alright though - I would have been hard-pressed to spend the $50 in gift cards at another time. Yay for heavy reductions on out-of-pocket costs!"							
341YLJU21IFGX57DHTVFR3IWB38I2W	"there's so much to say about it this place i dont know how to start ,,first our reservation was for 830,,we got seated at 830 but didnt  get to order till 10pm(seriously)an hour and a half for our server to take our order..then we got our food at 1100(btw theres 9 in our party)..my sis lambchops were past well done,(she asked for medium rare!!!),i ordered lobster fettucine w/ no peas and artichokes....what did i get??lobster fettucine with peas and artichokes!!!!my sis got her garlic mashed potatoes after she's almost done with chewing her very chewy lambchops..the rest of the food was well,,okay,,not great for what youre paying for...by the end of the night our bill totaled to almost $500.00...$80.00 of it Is gratuity for our server who we saw twice...  IM NEVER COMING BACK TO THIS PLACE.....  IF YOU WANT ITALIAN FOOD,,,YOU MIGHT AS WELL GO TO MACARONI GRILL,,WAY MUCH BETTER AND LESS EXPENSIVE....."							
39RRBHZ0AUHBPMUP573CT3IX4E2VZD	"There's this smell as soon as you walk in that is kind of unpleasant.  Bathroom-esque.  Its weird because I actually went to the bathroom and it doesn't really smell.  Its actually pretty nice in there.  They have to do something about that smell....  I'm not sure what all the excitement was over the chips and salsa.  The chips were not as greasy as some places and actually a little thicker.  The red salsa was pretty good, but wouldn't say the best in this area.  (Los Olivos takes that prize).  There's this other creamy weird looking sauce they put out as well with the chips.  Not very good at all.  They should just replace that with the verde sauce in the sauce bottle that they bring with the tacos.  I do agree that the plating's very well done here.  We got the hot wings which were solid.  Not the best but definitely not the worst.  Cooked well, not too small, good sauce and good amount of sauce.  The wings probably could have used a little seasoning to them to the next level.  The carnitas street tacos were also pretty solid.  Not sure if the grilled onions work here..  I think I would've preferred just the pico de gallo type topping on these.  They were really good though, esp with the salsa verde and the salsa rojo (we asked for more to eat the tacos with)  All in all, I think I'll go back and try an entree.  Might see another star......  but I'll probably wait for one of those mailing coupon deals.  The prices aren't crazy, but given the hh food I'd rather not gamble big on this one.  The hh prices aren't great either - about $5 for pretty much every choice, alcohol's a bit better at about $3."							
3VIVIU06FKS649B6RBEZ6CWUH8OIMM	They changed the menu and no longer have salads or the unique items I mentioned from 1-24-12 so we left. I don't think it is necessary to drop a star since my last meal was good.							
37NXA7GVSTMRKXDLQ6C3LO7ZP5UVLU	They do not have any of the special 2 or 3 course menus. Not worth the drive to this location. I would go to Sahara and Decatur or inside the suncoast. Def will not be coming back to this location. Don't want anyone else to waste there time coming here. Hope this helps							
30OITAWPBQJR1UHSWKS91EPVHW29HL	they do not make good scrambled eggs. the pumpkin pacakes were pretty good though							
30F94FBDNR00UWNKUYNU63N9GQ1BT8	They have done a great job with this place. It has been fixed up and you would never know this was formerly occupied by the smelly Banana Leaf. I had two tacos with a side of guac. It was delicious. You MUST have the guacamole. So nice to have something this good in  my neck of the woods.							
35XW21VSVGUBS5WHWB7YA1NSQ10SLM	"This food was very good the bread they give is yummy don't eat to much of it you'll get full. The fettuccine Alfredo was good the chicken was very tender except i seen a picture here on yelp and my Alfredo had no broccoli,  my boyfriend had the chicken saltimbocca which he said was really good all together it was wonderful good services and not to expensive"							
3BDORL6HKKT6OM2Y49EUH8S9AQ3CR2	This Friday's was cool. We went on a not so busy day so that was a plus. Idk about my friends but I enjoyed it. It was no different then the Friday's in California. My artichoke dip was on point and my pasta was delish. I'd recommend Friday's over the buffet that the hotel offered.							
3SD15I2WD2APP38VJS0VDAXJ8QD36Y	This has to be my favorite italian restaurant in Vegas. It feels like you just wanna be with your family when you come here. Eggplant parmesan with meat sauce is one of my faves. I wouldn't normally order fried calamari at any other restaurant but it's the first thing I wanna order when I get here. It's light and not chewy which I looove! My son eats up most of his spaghetti and can't get enough. Mama's lasagna is pretty mean too. I'm looking forward to trying other stuff on the menu. but all i can think about is the eggplant parm!							
335VBRURDJGFHKQQ6JK3GBSIPGBE9B	"This IHOP just opened. The place is all new, clean and has comfortable modern decor. The food was cold and the service colder. Our orders was wrong, had to repeatedly ask for water refills."							
3UY4PIS8QR11ML08V58TRS485WO1NE	"This is a Breakfast ,Lunch place that used to be beyond Great! We really loved coming here many years ago. The same people worked here and it was always a pleasure to come in. Food was wonderful and so was the service.  Then things started to change. The food was not as good, They changed the menu up.  Then the staff started to change. When you start losing all the staff you have had for so many years something is not right inside the company. The service and food really went downhill. So we stopped coming here.  Well, lately I have been back 2x's. Things are better. They are trying. But, it is still not the same. However, service is fast again, and they do check on you all the time. Food is working it self back up the hill. Maybe they should fo more organic or something. It is still a good place, just not what it was."							
382GHPVPHS7BAG4H047GGCD5CZ743E	"This is a chain restaurant, but it doesn't feel like it. It's interior suggests something closer to fine dining, but the prices are actually really reasonable. One of the best things about it is the view it has.   It's pretty basic Italian food, but you'll feel like you are getting more than your money's worth."							
3BAWBGQGYLFS5COJMCBT2JPYULPV7L	"This is a medium size greek restaurant on the side of Papago Plaza - I wish it was at a more visible location. This year they renovated their place and improved their menu.  I come here twice or thrice a week for lunch as it closest and best place to eat near my workplace.  Even though I prefer eating at home, it is not always feasible, so Mika comes to my rescue.  I do feel that their food has too much of sodium, atleast more than what should be there is a healthy food. I know that high sodium content in food is a problem all across US, but it doesn't hurt expecting from a place you eat out a lot."							
363A7XIFV42AOEMHTFNDCAROVTVVAC	"This is a nice, clean location, has dual drive thru lanes, and is insanely fast!! I am very impressed with how efficient they are."							
3FBEFUUYRKLP9O7GS7F50IBPE056AX	"This is a Spanish Tapa's restaurant that we stopped at on a Saturday for lunch, before heading to Red Rock Canyon.     The decor is quite pleasant, and for a Saturday lunch it was not crowded at all.  The majority of the menu is made of small tapa type dishes.  The food was amazing and wonderful.  We shared 5 different dishes plus a dessert. Every dish we had was full of flavor and just so tasty!  With a rate of 5/5, I would imagine most the dishes on the menu would be quite good.  The service was also attentive.  The only thing that holds me back from giving it a 5/5, is that if I came here when I was super hungry, the bill would be far too expensive.  It is perfect, if you want a ""lighter"" lunch.  I would most definitely return for brunch or lunch."							
3SNR5F7R9298SLJTADQGT4RL86XIEX	"This is another place that I've only experience for Happy Hour.  I would have given the place a 5 if they hadn't taken the pizzas off the HH menu.   They were so good, the other items like the crispy onions, the mozarella sticks, etc. were still fabulous.  They usually have drink specials as well, like deals on Pink Vodka martinis.  Depending on the day, there is also a piano player in the lounge/bar area."							
37NXA7GVSTMRKXDLQ6C3LO7ZP5VLVL	"This is by far my favorite Italian restaurant.  I think as far as value goes you get a great experience.  The views are great at this location.  Being right on the strip and having the whole wall on the strip side being windows it's a great view of the Wynn and Encore hotels.  I've had so many different meals here and never been disappointed.  The chicken parm. the rigatoni D(my favorite pasta dish here) and the Marsala are all fantastic.  For the price it is the best Italian restaurant I have ever been too and have been going to this Maggianos location for the last four years.  I've been to places in Vegas that are twice the price, half the portion, and 1/4 the food quality.   Don't miss this place if your in Vegas!"							
33BFF6QPI1RNJIN1AADZB4WWWS63WZ	"This is by far the best Maggiano's I've been too.   I've been to the California location, as well as the Washington D.C location, and this one takes the cake.  My boyfriend and I make a 2 week trip to Vegas every summer. This past year, we decided to dine at Maggiano's afters having a good experience in CALI. The food here is SOOOOOO good, we ended up dining here 5 more times before we left.   I recommend going with a group of 4 or more, because they have great ""package deals"" for larger parties. You can choose between 3 different price groups, all that come with different options, which are all reasonable and well worth the money.   I'm absolutely gaga (No lady, stay out of this one) over their Chicken Francese and their mash potatoes. To DIE! Their Chicken Francese is not traditional, however. It is breaded and then smothered in lemon sauce. I'm drooling just thinking about it.  Did I mention they don't stop bringing more food until you tell them too? GO HUNGRY!"							
3TD33TP5DLIVF0OBOYWDBYXHS1GABM	"This is literally my favorite restaurant in Vegas. As a true Italian and eating REAL home cooked Italian food my whole life, it is sometimes hard to find a place that can compare to grandma's cooking.   The service here is ALWAYS amazing (I go often.) It doesn't matter what you get, you will enjoy it. I recommend the Raviolis and their house salad (yuuum!)   There's a little ""secret"" that isn't such a secret anymore.. After you are seated, ask for the ""Family Style"" menu. They'll bring you a totally different menu with great prices and it's all ""family style."" They'll keep bringing you more and more of what you want until you ask to stop :) And I have tried everything on this menu and it's all delicious. I think the minimum you need to get family style is only three people. It is well worth it, I promise.  You gotta try this place! I promise you'll enjoy it!"							
3AXFSPQOYQEWTA3VN6VMNNRLXM2FJP	"This is my favorite restaurant. I love to eat here with my family for birthdays and such. They have some of the best Italian food I have ever tasted. There's really good spaghetti, Fettuccine Alfredo with broccoli (my favorite with or without greens), and chicken Parmesan. They also have this stuff called onion strings (like a small, classy plate of mini, entangled onion rings) that is cravable, especially with the creamy, lemonish sauce. You have to ask for it on the side, though, or you may not get it. The atmosphere is really nice, too, especially if you're in the room surrounded by windows (unless someone suicidal brought a pet rock as their date). They give you a dessert on your birthday. They used to be lemon cookies, but I think they changed it to cake. I don't particularly like the desserts, but my family LOVES those lemon cookies! Overall, this is one of the best Italian places. Period."							
3L7SUC0TTUAVXEUQNLPT08WYVE8M0W	"This is my first time at a ""buyer beware"" restaurant!  When a customer takes a bite then returns a dish because it's not good, the restaurant doesn't happily take it back... then charge for it anyway. Right? Not normal, Maggiano's - especially for a supposedly established chain upscale restaurant. (It was soggy bow-tie pasta a/ spinach, btw.  Ick. Exchanged for Pizza-Hut quality spaghetti marinara, though they still charged for the more expensive bow-tie - we balked, but they would not budge. Supposedly it came from the kitchen or management, the nice waitress still got our normal 18% tip.)  Bad taste in my mouth from a bland dish and dirty rotten maneuver. First and last time, thank you.  UPDATE: After a whole lot of nudging they apologized and fixed the difference on my credit card.  They also said they were sending a little ""gift"".  Well, now it's been three months and nothing ever arrived.    So for same reason -- careless lack of regard / seriousness for customer service -- STARS UNCHANGED.  The customer service training at this outfit just is rather careless, and that doesn't feel good.  Very nice people, everyone I interacted with, but they lack common classy restaurant business sense.  Maybe it's Vegas culture and I'm used to L.A. and midwest?  I do sense there's a weird thing going on in Vegas service culture.  Anyway, I'm ragging on their manners, but two-stars also reflects the quality of food, it's really quite unremarkable.  Interior modern but likewise absolutely unremarkable.  (BUT, and this was nice, a guy goes around and sings to your table.  Don't know if that's regular.  Normally would have earned a star for that ;)"							
3THR0FZ95P9WUD4OPUQPQWDRTCYOLM	"This is my fourth visit and the food and service seem pretty much consistent.  Ordered the margherita pizza for an appetizer and for my main course I had the spinach and chicken manicotti.  Fortunately, I also got to try the linguine di mare and the chicken parmesan that my party ordered.  They were all delicious but the manicotti has to be my favorite.    This is a very inexpensive restaurant with generous portions, so it's definitely worth the try after a long day of shopping.  Be sure to call in advance otherwise you'd be waiting as long as an hour and a half to be seated.  Ask for a table next to the window with view of LVBlvd, not one of the best, but still a pretty sight for you out of towners."							
30OITAWPBQJR1UHSWKS91EPVHW39HM	"This is near my downtown condo, which is convenient since I can eat here multiple times a week without tiring of it.  Free newspapers, great service and friendly staff who remembers their ""regular"" customers, breakfast all day and huge glasses of iced tea - adds up to a very enjoyable, affordable meal."							
3Z33IC0JC02WJVCC199DGFG4PBD9VB	"This is not a good restaurant experience. I think this restaurant is about to close.   Ambiance: Empty restaurant on a Wednesday at 8:30pm. Hip hop - pop music at Spanish restaurant. Gang members with unconcealed weapons and lit cigarettes in a non smoking restaurant.   Food: seafood was rotting and had to be returned.  Even the sangria was poorly made, although drinkable.    Rice pudding had decent flavors but was not finished cooking (rice was hard and liquid had not yet been absorbed).  Oxtail was good. Ahi tuna is tasteless. Fried artichokes are sour and runny.   Service: very nice waiters but have not been trained in proper service steps. All the tapas came out at the same time and couldn't fit on the table.   Conclusion: it's not good enough for their price. Good news is that the next restaurant in this space might be better!"							
30P8I9JKOI1DI8A0YJWW4ZB23FV5VH	"This is one of my favorite restaurants in Vegas.  Less crowded, much cheaper, better service, and better food...  I don't want to go to any Italian restaurants in casino hotels anymore!"							
32CXT5U14GJWSB42RRTUKXJARYNU8J	"This is probably the best Italian chain restaurant that I've ever eaten at. Not only did I enjoy the atmosphere and service, the food was phenomenal!   To start off a very nice family vacation, we decided to eat at Maggiano's and try their family-style dinner. The server - who is probably the best I've ever met - warned us that it will be a lot of food and very heavy. We took on the challenge and tried their ""classic dinner"": (2) appetizers, (2) salads, (4) main courses, and (2) desserts.   Appetizers: Barb's Spinach and Artichoke Dip & Calamari Fritte. They split the spinach and artichoke dip into two plates and had a giant plate of fried calamari. Both were excellent dishes - the calamari was not overcooked and the dip was just gooey perfection.  Salad: Caesar and Spinach. I'm not a big salad eater, but I heard it was excellent.  Main Course: Chicken Piccata, Chicken Saltimbocca, Grilled Salmon Lemon & Herb, and Linguini & Clams with Red Sauce. Each dish was amazing! The Piccata was not overcooked or drowning in sauce. The Saltimbocca, which is fried chicken patties wrapped in prosciutto and cheese, was just delicious! The salmon was good. And the linguini was not drowning in sauce and just the right amount of clams.  Dessert: Tiramisu and Creme Brulee. Both were just perfect - the tiramisu was just so delicious - not too sweet and not too bland. The creme brulee had the perfect golden crust and was so smooth.  Yes, it is a lot of food for a table of five. But it gets better for those who think $30 a person is a bit too much. Each plate - from the appetizer to the desert - is refillable! They won't stuff giving you until you tell them no more! So for the price, the service, and the food - Maggiano's is definitely worth it!"							
3R4QIDVOJPSWCGH7EU0P8PTTGDREEL	This is usually my go to place at the orleans for drinks and having a good dinner! I love the Jack D ribs and shrimp combo. Service is pretty good! Only waited a couple of minutes before a waiter showed up. Food is always hit the spot!							
36FQTHX3Z37VVFPQFJH3OQJBMROB3R	"This location has been many different restaurants over the years - this is a tough spot. This is my favorite thing it's been though.   The food is great here and the owner is cool. The prices are really reasonable and the portions are large. The place is really clean and the decor is nice. Everything is cooked in plain sight, so there's no mystery.   My only complaint would be that he doesn't deliver yet. We definitely need a good gyro place that delivers in the area.  Seriously though - the food is really delicious. If you like flavors - it's all really flavorful. Great hummus too. Try the pizza puff."							
3T8DUCXY0NMH638NWE9YFXSJSQY9TW	"This maggiano's is pretty pleasant, perhaps an alternative restaurant if you just spent too long at fashion show and cannot dare cross the street (the obstacle of crossing the street from point a to point b has left me 20 minutes late PLENTY of times, even if it's just from saks to the wynn!). Also a good restaurant for bigger portions--their plates can be a foot long for a single person. Big portions! A homey feeling, which is very common for them."							
3TCFMTM8HE45XZBF9MA9Z41AU1X12N	"This Maggiano's, like all the others, is what it is....but a little bit better given the excellent viewpoint from the fashion show mall out onto the strip.  Went here with 12 people and had wonderful time despite the mediocre food.  Like all chains, the menu is formulaic and there are hits and misses.    Hits include the super garlicy Shrimp Oreganata, Garlic Shrimp Linguine, and Lobster Ravioli.  Needless to say, they do garlic right.  The tiramisu was also quite tasty and enormous (not that this matters much since Maggiano's is all you can eat)  Misses included a mediocre (actually pretty bad) gnocchi, oily and limp Eggplant Parmesan, and cheesecake that was heavy and flavorless.  I last went t this Maggiano's back in 2005 and can't say I'd recommend it for 'fine dining,' but in terms of bang-for-your-buck in Las Vegas it is certainly a valid option.  2 Stars for the food, 4 for a good time atomsphere with a big group.  Its closer to a 2.5 than a 3, but I'll round up for good memories."							
32CXT5U14GJWSB42RRTUKXJARYN8UX	This neighborhood niche is one of my favorite local restaurants. Give this place a shot people... Good guys...great food..!							
3P4ZBJFX2VJIZU3UU5E1CDLTZIAFWJ	"This place has certainly changed alot, they use to have the best caesar salad and on our visit this past saturday, not so good, barely had any dressing on it.  Service was also very poor, I understand they are very very busy but we waited a very long time to get our bread.  Our waiter had not help from his busser.  I don't like how you can no longer order small and large, food quality has definately gone down. :("							
386659BNTLXY1P81UZ6VGG8VX3D103	"This place has great salads! Right next to SkySong in the Papago Plaza is George's Gyros. You will find two cases fridge with a variety of waters, specialty drinks and greek yogurt drinks! Check out their menu of gyros, salads and more! My favorite is the chicken salad.    I can't wat to try the desserts.   Reasonably priced place for FRESH food. Low calorie but yum. Great for lunch and dinner. Quick. Next to Britsh Open Pub on the South West corner of Scottsdale Rd."							
3LXX8KJXPWP1TB3F0XNZLNMWTIGO9O	"This place has really good Italian food for amazing prices, considering it's on the ""Strip"". I had the Crab and Shrimp Cannelloni ($15) which nearly brought a tear to my eye because it was so delicious. The pasta was made fresh and cooked perfectly, the sauce was fairly rich (made from Asiago) and creamy, and the contents of the cannelloni were superb. Washed it all down with a Peroni on draft.   This may be a chain restaurant but you'd never know it. Will definitely be coming back!"							
3BPP3MA3TC0AIMRZVGNTLKJDPARLEE	"This place is a true gem on the Las Vegas Strip.  Walking into this place you would think it's a five-star restaurant with prices to match but thankfully, the prices here were very affordable and in true Italian style, the portions were very large.  We would have taken what we had left-over to go but with no place to heat it up at our hotel, it wasn't worth it.  Located in the Fashion Mall, if you love Italian food, this is the place to be."							
3D17ECOUOEBUIH7YDMOEIE620FX13Y	"This place is always good. Nice atmosphere, no long waits, food is great! Best of all, it's located on the Strip within the Fashion Show Mall. My only advice? Arrive by 6pm for dinner, or you may have a bit of a wait."							
3D5G8J4N5AKF3ALQZFEU7FHGJIGTVV	This place is amazing .. My husband and I went there for a dinner date and it was magical ..the staff was really friendly ...and the food was delicious and in huge portions ...i couldn't finish my pasta (( and i'm an eater )) hehehe..i just love it.							
3S1L4CQSFXLLSH0RT0I9UOO27Z8AF4	"This place is awesome. I never miss a chance to dine there every time I am in Vegas. Our last dinner there was for New Year's eve 2009.  I had never ordered family style....be ready for pregnancy pants :-) They serve an incredible amount of food...great food. The atmosphere was great with a lovely duo of violinists playing songs we requested.  Ordering family is style is great when you're a large party (4 or more). The choice is limitless.  For fewer people, I would recommend a la carte. My very favorite dish is the braised beef cannelloni....The beef and sauce are divine (it's better ordered a la carte than family style as it comes piping hot from the oven rather than on a large plate for everyone to share) Their spinach salad and Maggiano steak salad are both great. Don't miss the lasagna too and the Apple crostada (so buttery).  Maggiano, please open another location in the Bay Area closer to SF or in the East Bay. San Jose is too far!! What about Walnut Creek??"							
3421H3BM9AXNS0CIKKVUDR5AUO7J91	"This place is busy, but the kids love the pancakes so much food for the price."							
373L46LKP7M79WV9OHMJ30JQ5IJKJW	"This place is crazy busy, but the Crispy Zucchini app was stellar and worth the wait. Our entree was just ok, the linguine di mare, probably wouldn't order it again. Our server really was phenomenal, and took great care of us."							
36FFXPMST94U8HLYY9BRY4KKCVPHO8	This place is delicious! First time in Vegas and wanted to get some good Italian food. I'm a customer for life now! The food was amazinnnggg and the waiter we had was so nice! He comped our drinks and gave us free cookies at the end. I love this restaurant. You won't be disappointed. The environment is nice and it is a very classy place. Highly recommend!							
3MIVREZQVHEOVJZMJ76S01VCJDAQKS	"This place is great for a chain restaurant. I have not found many Italian restaurants I like, and my husband is very picky when it comes to Italian food. The service is great and the food is always reliably good. I lived in Vegas for almost 3 years and visited Maggianos at least 15 or 20 times and was never disappointed. We went as a large group with about 25 people when our friends from Boston were all out visiting, and decided to order family style. This was probably not necessary as most of the food went to waste because there was just too much of it. The portions are huge and I usually split a salad app and meal with my husband which is just enough for the both of us with room for dessert (you have to try the profiteroles!)  It's a great place to stop in for dinner before heading over to the Wynn, Encore, Palazzo or Venetian. The view isn't the best, and you usually have to wait 15-20 minutes with a reservation on a Friday or Sat night after 7pm, but compared to other places that isn't bad at all. If there is a Maggianos close to where you live then I would check out all the other places Vegas has to offer, but if not it is a good place to dine."							
33BFF6QPI1RNJIN1AADZB4WWWS5W3R	"This place is great!!! I recommend the homemade Lasagna. I would definently go again :), what got me disappointed a little was the server she was slow."							
3EN4YVUOUC8DTWUGN018TURS1RYJXK	"This place is just fine.  You will have a decent breakfast.  Their coffee is great, they have lots of different flavored creamers and the food is fine.  We got tired of paying $20 for breakfast at the big named hotels across the street.  We tried this place out and never ate at the hotels again, even if the boss was paying.  Certainly worth a trip if you're stuck in downtown for a few days."							
3QHITW7OYOPIJ6Q07GT36NSGE1GQAD	"This place is like a fancy Buca di Beppo.  We ordered the Old Famous Rigatoni, Baked Ziti Pasta, and the Surf and Turf.  The only thing I enjoyed was the Famous Rigatoni, very flavorful and delicious.  The baked ziti pasta was very bland and tasteless.  The surf and turf was a mistake for a pasta place."							
3KTCJ4SCVGHV43F8J4TTEDF806E1ME	"This place is located upstairs in the front outside part of the Fashion Show mall on the strip.  If your driving park on the north side of the mall in the underground parking.  This place was packed with people, yet we still got seated very quickly.  The waiter was very pleasant and helpful.  We ordered a linguine with white clam sauce (very good:), the bracciola (ok), Maggiano's Salad (yummy), and Chicken Marsala (good, but I prefer cheesecake factory's...I know, I know, don't yell at me!)  The prices were very reasonable, and the complimentary bread was oh so yummy with the olive oil and vinegar!"							
3X55NP42EOWXZ9Q0YOZ4JAO03V33P4	"This place is OK. Nothing above the ordinary, but not below average either. The food is good, the service so so . I have heard so many good things about this place that maybe I was dissapointed when I was not overly impressed with it.  Very little parking, bathroom is clean. Food comes out nice and hot and the tea is decent. The place could use a bit of a shine up for sure. Prices are good though. I would go back for sure."							
3ZC62PVYDHQEOGZ544G9K3Z7CPCXXL	This place is sooooo yummy! I went for dinner and there was a little bit of a wait but it wasn't too bad. There's not much of a waiting area which sucks because it feels like you're always in the way. Once we were seated it was more of the same. The tables were very close together and people kept squeezing by our table which truly annoyed me. For that reason i had to remove one star. However everything else was superb! I had the lobster ravioli which was delicious. In fact I'm making myself hungry just thinking about it! I also had a Caramel apple martini which was delicious! I had to get another. By the end of the meal my belly was full and my body was tipsy. I'd say that's a perfect way to end the day! :-)							
3MNJFORX8BKOMBOAY4RSMD8GFL6F52	"This place is surprisingly nice on the inside and has a wide array of menu options.  This is not just another ***bertos it is a hybrid seat down place.  You sit, get a menu that's not on the wall, and then order to a person at your table.  The menu if full of great options from traditional plates and Mexican fare like burritos and tacos, to less seen in the gringo world real gorditas.  Your meal will start with chips that come with some salsa bean mix on top.  I am not sure if it is veg so be sure to ask them to leave it off if you care. There is a salsa bar with one of the best red salsas I have had in a long time, green salsa, avocado dip, carrots, pico and a crock pot of beans again probably not veg.  Prices are pretty good my chillie rellno plate was on special for $6 a huge plate with rice beans tortillas (corn or flour) and a great large chillie rellno.  Sure this may be a bit west of the trendy down town but it's worth a try."							
3I7KR83SNATI3KI025V6E65N9D69KP	This place is the same as Falbos (which I also give  ) and I really love the pizza here. It is topped with many mushrooms if you order them. I really recommend this place.							
3O2Y2UIUCQAR4U9D5RVYO2RYCB1FKN	"This place kinda blows, it's pretty on the inside. The service is pretty weak. The food is always lukewarm, doesn't really have that fresh taste quality. I've gone twice now and the only appealing part was the rice pudding. Sucks because john cutter's is always on point!"							
356ZPKYPUHXYFCNON9SU94KDCWXPYV	"This place really got my taste buds going! Everything they brought out was so incredibly delicious! I found this place on Groupon & immediately checked Yelp for reviews! Decided to try it due to my undying love for Tapas! It was 40$ worth of food for 20$.   Toros is actually a gaming restaurant as well & I do appreciate that it's a NON-SMOKING gaming restaurant. That actually why I gave this place 5 star rating instead of a 4.  Cocktails- when you text Toros to 99158 , you can get a free drink! So I did & my first cocktail was Strawberry Bojito! It tasted like a Mojito & I'm a fan. My second drink was a white sangria. Oh gosh, worse sangria I ever had. lol only bad thing about this whole review was that darn white sangria.   For foods!  Stuffed Piquillo Peppers 7$- It was stuffed with crabmeat and goat cheese swimming in a tomato sauce. BUT, it only comes out with 2 peppers (as seen on my picture) so when it came out, me & the beau looked at each other like ""that's it?"" But boy was it delicious!   Sliders $9- those were cute. I didn't really think anything special about it. Only thing different about it is it had a slice of ham in it which added a bacon effect to it.   Seared salmon $8- one of the best salmons I ever had! It came out with sauted spinach which was so good! It was laid on a garlic sauce which was oozing with flavors!   Meatballs 7$- It comes with 3 juicy meatballs. Nothing really to say but it was delicious!   Buffalo wings $12- of course everywhere we go we the beau ALWAYS has to get buffalo wings! These were really spicy and it came out with a spicy aioli dipping sauce! That really made those chicken wings memorable!   Flan- & for Dessert, my favorite! It was the perfect amount of sweetness and was the perfect size to end our meal.   The waitress was new but she had a lot of knowledge about the items. She was honest  about not trying most of the foods yet but gave us direction on popular items. She came to check on us regularly and when our food was taking long she would go & see what the hold up was. She was a doll!"							
375VMB7D4JZ30F5TEIFWNM908UWID4	"this place reminds me of a more refined dennys.   run of the mill breakfast spot. you wouldn't be missing out on much if you never ate here, and i only came here because the place i really wanted to get breakfast at had an hour wait.   i couldn't find any breakfast item that looked particularly appetizing, so i went with the buffalo chicken wrap. my gf ordered the choco chip pancake, and a side of scrambled eggs and ham. food came out, nothing special, taste and looks wise. my buffalo chicken wrap was overloaded with lettuce and lacked a suitable amount of chicken. the buffalo sauce was different than any i've ever had and wasn't very spicy. the bleu cheese crumbles were good though. i ordered a side of bleu cheese dressing and it came out looking like mayo. i don't know if i can ever eat bleu cheese after that. my gfs pancake was a ok nothing really stood out.  our sever was awesome though. everyone inside was very friendly. i appreciate good service."							
3909MD9T2ZXOIUH395KVQ7ETSE6EF3	This place sucks. The food is so expensive and tastes like shit. The gm is a nazi psycho who treats all employees like garbage so obviously theyre not in the best mood when they serve you. i hate them. fridays at home rules way harder than this stupid place							
334ZEL5JX6VJYQZE93NQ2IRML66OS0	"This place was absolutely great. Our waiter was attentive and helpful with menu choices, and the food was great! We were seated right away even though we ended up 30 min early for our reservation. I had the linguine with clams in the white wine sauce and my boyfriend had the scrimp scampi. His was amazing and they give you about 20 shrimp! Mine was good but I think the red sauce is probably better. It was a little bland so a lot of parmesan helped :)   Get the dessert sampler! It's delicious! Tiramisu, apple crostada, and the cheesecake were the best. The chocolate cake was really not great and kind of dry, and our creme brulee was runny and undercooked.   Overall good prices and good portions! $73 for 2 entrees, a dessert, and a bottle of wine. I would definitely come back."							
3D5G8J4N5AKF3ALQZFEU7FHGJIGVTX	"This place was great. My Dad loves a good spaghetti and meatballs, it's his go to favorite meal.  And me myself, I LOVE Chicken Parmesan. We went here  when we were visiting my Dad in the fall. We had a great, amazing view of the Strip, and it was right as the sun going down... PERFECT.  We all had great food, and great service. I know it's a chain but it was still good to enjoy it and the environment was great.  Hopefully, next trip out to Vegas to visit me Dad, we can stop again."							
33EEIIWHK7N2BUTYIBKZ2A6TZBHQVE	"This place was pretty good. The bread they brought to the table was ok, but the salad and the lasagna I ordered were both good and the mini cheesecake at the end was sooo yummy!  My boss, who is um, particular, didn't have such a good experience as his pasta was over done, but the waiter was nice and replaced it for him. I'm a pretty laid back diner so I kinda felt bad when my boss corrected him, etc but he handled it well.  They were great about refilling my water a ton of times. I'm on dr. orders to drink over a gallon a day so he helped me along:)"							
37YYO3NWHD62IKDFMCOZSDTNAP1CCX	"This place was pretty impressive. The GF and I received a gift card as a gift so we decided to go check it out a couple weeks ago.  It was packed as we went on a Friday night, but after the experience, you can see why it was so busy. Great food, great drink menu, and the best service I've ever received. Our waiter, M. (I'm not sure if it's polite to mention names even if he was awesome) is probably the best waiter in Las Vegas: polite, charming, and honest. So many times waiters are told to say ""everything is the best"". When asked about dishes and wines that were not his favorite he would say that they were fine but he would really recommend Dish X or Wine Y. It helped a lot that his recommendations were spot on and he wasn't just trying to pad the final bill; a lot of his recommendations were cheaper than what we had first asked about  As mentioned, even though this place had a packed house none of the waiters or waitresses seemed rushed or hurried. The food was cooked perfectly, the view was amazing, and the experience was perfect. The GF puts this in her 'Top Three Favorite Restaurants' category. To directly quote her, ""I love it!"".    I can't believe that this place is a chain. The set up is so nice; dark hardwood, dim lights, beautiful glassware.. It seems so against the whole 'Here's what corporate sent in a box, let's go throw this crap on the wall'.   Easily a new favorite. If you happen to get a male waiter whose name starts with the letter 'M', be prepared. You might just get the best waiter in Vegas."							
3SMIWMMK61L7IC0KPU90YDMW95QWU0	"This place was sooo close to getting 5 stars. However, one thing changed my mind.   I had a reservation in the lunch hours, and I was on time and on my reservation notes, I proposed a booth. It wasn't ready when I got there so we had to take a timer and stand around.  30 minutes later we got the booth, and it was facing outside which was a good view. This is the only reason it didn't get 5 stars. The booth took way to long to get and even when I put it for in advance.  The server was nice and quick, and explained the menu just right.  The food was amazing! I love italian food and decided to go with lasagna, and it was hot and fresh tasting. It wasn't a loud place and was very clean. I wil love to come back to try something else on the menu."							
3Z3R5YC0P33Q7DZ0Z09QPTEUVOSTF7	"This place would be a B for me. The food is great, not excellent but worth the price you pay for. The best aspect of this restaurant is the beautiful ambiance and the big portions.   Although i love Olive Garden, Maggianos is much more authentic Italian food. My usual entrees here are the Lasagna, the Rigatoni D, and the Calamari;] Yum Some of their entrees are good but I've realized that most the white based sauces could taste a little bland along with other pastas, but maybe it just comes down to preference.  Also while you're there take advantage of their delicious bread, we had like 3 rounds when we were there and they provide this dip that has olive oil and balsamic vinegar? not sure. But regardless if you want to eat good italian food with a nice view of the strip, you should consider going to Maggianos!  great for big groups, families, and dates:]"							
3AJA9FLWSCE0YZJP5OAMBMCLK7CIFF	"This restaurant has a very classy bar area, clean bathrooms, wonderful patio and helpful staff.  We were waited on by a young guy named Robert who attended to my friend and I wonderfully.  I haven't had service this courteous and prompt in years.  My friend had the ""San Francisco"" lobster linguine but replaced the linguine with wheat penne.  It was SO tasty!  I had the ""Chicago-style"" pasta.  It was bland and uneventful.  I even told our waiter but what can they do?  The bread we ate while we waited was fresh and tasty.    The real value to this place is the Italian dining-like experience on the strip without the large price tag.  I believe there were many lunch offerings for 12-15 dollars and there are a bunch of patio tables to take in the fresh air.  It was all but empty inside but this might be a classy dining experience for couples during the evening."							
3H5TOKO3D9ZA7ZRZJ65ENFPPMQ964M	This restaurant has done a bait and switch.  After eating there last week we were told to come back on Monday when food is half price.  When we arrived on 5/12/2014 we were told that they changed the menu no more specials!!  They list half off on their web page.  When we mentioned that we were told basically to bad we have to take care of that.  Not good.  Bad management.							
3S8A4GJRD3J91CAE3261W5P2ZA66VY	This restaurant should be rated $$$$.   $7 for one taco at lunch time with no side(s)?  I think not; I walked out after seeing the prices.  I wasn't prepared to pay $30 for a mexican lunch for one.							
3IKMEYR0LWB730X1HWGR4JX937XK29	This restaurant was a surprise. Very classy with outdoor seating overlooking the strip. They had an option where you could get family style that feeds four. Bruschetta not quite up to our standards but stuffed mushroom were awesome. Salad was excellent. Chicken piccata very nice and eggplant parm was great!!!!  My son had the beef tips and ate them all. I had lobster carbonara. All you can eat plus desert. $$$							
3O2Y2UIUCQAR4U9D5RVYO2RYCB2KFT	"This review is for the service that we received at dinner last week. Our waiter Donny was the worst waiter we have ever had! If you go to Maggiano's and get Donny as your waiter prepare to be insilted and treated like idiots when you ask him a simple question. No need to go into details but trust me on this. It is a shame because the waiter serving the table next to us was absolutely wonderful and very professional. Note to Donny, if you do not like people you probably should get out of the customer service business."							
3BCRDCM0ODAVL1G24YSUUWELJCZ6KC	"This review is hard to write because there were both good and bad things happening during our visit.  We were celebrating my cousin's bachelorette party with 10 of us total.  Not a crazy number of people, but I understand it is hard to seat us.  We made reservations a month before our visit for this reason.  Our reservations were at 7 pm, but we did not get seated until 7:30.  The people before us wouldn't leave.  I understand that this was not the restaurants fault but it was annoying non the less.  We were seated at a beautiful table, but were crammed in the corner.  So much so that the waiter had to have us pass everything around because he couldn't get to everyone.  Again, not a deal breaker, but annoying.  We sat there for what seemed like forever before we got any bread or water...all the while watching our waiter run around like a chicken with his head cut off serving a billion other people.  We had not even put in our drink order before he came back asking us for our meal order.  We were not even offered appetizers.  At this point it is probably 45 minutes to an hour after our original reservation time.  The one thing my cousin (and half the table) wanted was their special chicken tortellini.  She had been raving about it since we made the reservations a month ago.  Much to our surprise they were completely out.  Seriously?!?!  For a place that claims everything is made to order...why couldn't they just make more?  Again, annoying because now we had to decide on different meals which meant the waiter would leave our table and disappear in to the abyss for another 10 - 15 minutes.  Finally, we make our drink and food order all at the same time.  I ordered the mushroom ravioli with a spinach side salad.  They only brought out one of the two spinach salads we ordered so we all shared knowing full well if we tried to get another one out there, it wouldn't come before the entree.    During this time, the bachelorette's sister spoke to management about some of the annoyances we had experienced and asked if there was anything they could do to make this night memorable in a good way.  They delivered!  In a big way.  We received a bottle of champagne, the bride-to-be received a free drink and they brought our dessert for all.  They were amazing!  My mushroom ravioli was so good, as were everyone else's meals, that is almost made up for all the little bothersome things that occurred.  The dessert definitely did though."							
3OZ4VAIBEXVLP7PLNL0Q59U7LGPVJS	"This TGI Friday's is located inside The Orleans hotel. It is a smaller size TGI Friday's. I've been here on occassion to get a drink either after a movie or after some bowling. So far, I've always gotten very friendly service at this location. The hostesses are okay, but I've gotten nothing but friendly faces from servers. One of the things I love about this TGI Friday's is that they have the 3 different Ultimate Sangrias. I'm sure it's not the only TGI that has it, but for some reason, the TGI Friday's in the Bay Area do not have the Ultimate Sangrias. And let me tell you, the Ultimate Sangrias are sooooo good here. Great flavorful blend of wine, alcohol, juice, and sliced up fresh fruit in the drink.  As far as the food, there's not much to say about it. It's just greasy, fattening American food. I wouldn't come here for a meal, but I have to admit, a late night drink + one of their appetizers is YUMMY."							
3XDSWAMB2286CLNYRUPUCII4E41CQ1	"This TGI Friday's is similar to the one at Gold Coast, with the same 24 hour happy hour specials. This place is not as good as the one at Gold Coast. The portions were a bit smaller, yet the food was still good."							
309D674SHZ1J8FL98CS4HTN5S41BCP	"This TGIF is horrendous if you sit anywhere, but the bar.  Slow service or no service every time I go eat there.  Then why do I go back?? Because my family put a gun to my head, tied me up,  and dragged me there so they can use their comps.  Ugh.  I noticed it doesn't matter which server I get.  They will seat you and sometimes it takes 10-15mins before anyone notices you didn't even get drinks or place settings. Then it takes another 15-20 mins before the server asks for your order.  Once you get your food, you better make sure you have everything you need when the server asks if you needed anything else otherwise you will not see her till she/he brings you the check.  It's like they go in the kitchen to chat or something.  The place isn't even busy during the times I've gone.  This franchise ruins TGIF's brand."							
36AZSFEYZ4GF7OR9ZTN97LBUDBHBVO	"This visit was to celebrate Alicia R's birthday.  The Wonder Twins (aka Terri R and Alicia R) invited me and you know I am not turning down a good meal with the hottest twins in Las Vegas. Besides, it's been forever since I step foot in here.  It's had to be at least 5 years and I've been really missing out.   I've only been to one other Maggiano's and that one is located in Costa Mesa.  Maggiano's use to be the place where my favorite sister would take me for my birthday.  All I remember from Maggiano's is a lot of good food, huge portions, great service, and long waits even with a reservation.    This Maggiano's is a lot similar to the Costa Mesa location.  This place was packed on Friday, great food, huge portions, and great service.  Only difference, which is a big one, there was zero wait.  I had their Parmesan Crusted Tilapia which was really good and the portions had to be triple of what you get compared to other restaurants. The $20 price tag is pretty good considering that I had over 10 oz of great tasting fish.  After my meal, I washed it down with 3 scoops for their Vanilla Bean Ice Cream.  I offered to share, but everyone in our table had their own treat.  I didn't want to put my dessert to waste, so I killed it.   There's not too many Maggiano's around in any city.  I believe that this is the only one in Las Vegas.  I've never had a poor experience at Maggiano's and recommend if you're looking for fine Italian food with huge portions.   PS:  Happy Birthday to Alicia R. (aka Terri R's twin, aka my 5K partner, aka my half marathon inspiration, aka Yes, and aka the former Finger Printing Lady).  Ha Ha...and more nicknames to come."							
3OND0WXMHWV8WQ894V8VTSQ68TJHE4	"This was a great place to eat on the strip.  We didn't have reservations, but we took seats in the bar area. Other reviews suggested reservations, so if you have a large group or need to make a show, make reservations.  I had the tomato basil soup and chopped salad. Both were wonderful.  My husband had the spaghetti and meatballs. My children had the cheese ravioli's and the penne pasta. They also offer family style meals if you prefer that.  The waitress was very friendly and service was great.  I would recommend this to anyone going to Vegas. so much of the food we ate was overpriced and mediocre. This was reasonably priced and delicious."							
3ZVPAMTJWNJJ5YI36VAD7ZDO8IWRGS	"This was my first visit to Maggiano's, so I didn't know what to expect. We made reservations and were promptly seated. We waited for a guest who showed up a few minutes late, but our waiter was kind enough to check on us while we waited.  Once our guest showed up, we ordered 2 appetizers;   fried calamari- soft and non chewy, seasoned well  fried eggplant- sliced thin, breaded and fried- double yummy'  salad- I don't remember what kind, but they were kind enough to substitute the gorgonzola cheese with mozarella.I had to ask them for more avocado, since there was only one piece in the whole salad. I think the waiter returned with a few more pieces (there must have been a shortage of avocados that day). Plus, the dressing was a little weak and I could barely taste it  (they must have been short on that too).  cream pasta with chicken dish- There was barely any sauce on this and what I did manage to get onto my pasta and fork, seemed to have a nice subtle taste to it. Would have been nice to be served pasta that glistened with sauce, instead of me looking and wondering if there was any on there to begin with. Instead of the slogan, ""where's the beef?"" the guestion of the day, should have been, ""where's the sauce?""  Service- good food- mediocre' price- moderate   Our waiter mentioned that they'd soon be opening a Maggiano's in Hawaii, I hope by the time that they do, the quality of the food will improve.  Maybe I went on a off day, but I'm willing to give them a second chance.  Till next time, happy eating!"							
33IXYHIZB5Y4H05RLA5O6OK4JA22E8	"This was my first visit to this restaurant. The decor is nicely appointed; classy yet not ostentatious. The wait staff was young but knowledgeable, friendly and helpful but never intrusive. I had the linguine di mare which was perfectly prepared. It was mildly spicy and contained a nice mixture of lobster, shrimp, mussels and clams. Though I found it very generous with the lovely shrimp, I found it less than generous with the lobster - I found one small piece on my plate. The clams and mussels were tasty but rather small. One of my companions had the seared tuna which he very much enjoyed. The portion was large and was cooked perfectly medium rare with an ideal 1/8 inch seared thickness all around and a rare center. My other companion had the Parmesan crusted tilapia. It was well cooked and tasty. We accompanied our dinner with a bottle of their nice house chianti. For dessert, the three of us shared a generous and quite delicious order of the cannoli cake. With two rounds of drinks and tip, the bill was $240 for the three of us. A very enjoyable experience well suited to a special occasion."							
3G5RUKN2ECJJBQ33ZINM6YMR38C9NV	"This was probably the best meal of my trip.  We got there a little late in the evening so there was no wait, which is always nice.  Their portions are HUGE and you get a really good deal for what you pay for.  We got the sampler platter which is enough food by itself for three people.  We had a salad and soup and some other dish and everything was great.  The staff waited on us hand and foot and we had the most adorable waiter too!  What a nice surprise to find in the Fashion Mall.  I will be back here the next time that I'm in Vegas.  Why spend tons of money in the hotels when this place is far better!!!"							
3DIIW4IV8PBQ0JM0L7E3KIFUVH44IE	"This was quite possibly the best Maggiano's experience I have had across three states.  When another reviewer claimed that  it was a ""step above the Olive Garden"" they were spot on.  My mother and I went here for Thanksgiving dinner while in Vegas avoiding family obligations.  We were able to make reservations online, which was fairly convenient and helped us avoid a long wait.  We were also able to order off of the special Thanksgiving menu, which was a great mix of the traditional Thanksgiving fare coupled with some Italian favorites.  They also brought you more of anything you wanted in spite of the original portions being humongous.    Overall, our experience was nice and we talk of a repeat dodging of the manicness that is Thanksgiving with the inclusion of our Maggiano's experience."							
34ZTTGSNJX4XTTYEDM3VN9FKRW7HQG	"This weekend I had a beautiful private dining experience at Maggiano's at Fashion Show.  My friends hosted my baby shower in a private room (with a great view and patio included!) for 30 people, passed appetizers, food table, dessert table and open bar.  It turned out beautifully and I could not be happier!  We worked with Sabrina, banquet manager, who was superb.  She recommended a menu (which was delicious and everyone loved the food!) for my mixed group (vegetarians, kids and adults), and helped us orchestra a budget that worked for the hosts.  I cannot tell you how grateful I am to have someone so lovely and gracious be a part of my special afternoon with my dear friends and family. I would do this again the exact same way and I'm looking for reasons to book another get-together in the same spot."							
3UAU495MII8ZD3RIY8IQHJ9A63ROUG	"To many, Maggiano's does not qualify as ""fine-dining"" establishment, primary because it's a sort of ""chain"" restaurant, and probably becaues they occasionally offer ""deals/discounts.""  Nonetheless, my experiences eating @ Maggianos in Los Angeles and in Las Vegas have proven that Maggiano's decor, presentation of foods, service, food taste, and overall dining experience has proven that Maggiano's is ""fine-dining"" for the regular Joe who likes good Italian food w/o having to skip out on a month's worth of eating out because of one really expensive meal :)  My experience @ Maggiano's in Vegas was actually, to a significant degree, better than my few times at the Grove location; our waiter was actually a waiter-in-training, but despite his lack of experience @ Maggiano's, he indicated he had extensive experience at other restaurants.  The first-class service he provided to us, despite his n00b status, indicated to me that Maggiano's did not hire your commonplace waiter who's only job was to write down what you wanted.  Not only was he able to describe to us in great detail the dishes we inquired about, he was also honest about what dishes he tried and would recommend.  Of course, he did press us a bit to order more than just entrees, so he was successful in getting us to order a few appetizers lol But those appetizers were all tasty and worth the price of entry (like $1-2 a person for our table of 8).    Customizing your entree with a variety of different pastas and sauces, and withholding from certain ingredients is expected @ Maggiano's.  They will ask you how you like things and if you aren't keen on a certain ingredient, the cook will gladly make it to your liking.  This also shows that their entrees aren't ""mass produced"" and  are made-to-order (which is why food takes a bit longer than most to come out).  However, our waiter also promised us that the pasta served was made-on-site and fresh daily, thus enforcing my belief that Maggiano's is a high-caliber restaurant.  Finally, one of the best parts of my experience eating @ Maggiano's is the fact that our waiter was extremely friendly, able to hold conversations and joke around with the group, and also treat us almost like a ""valued"" and welcomed patron of the restaurant.  Yes, we were eating during lunch/daylight hrs and it wasn't too busy, but our waiter made the extra effort and it definitely showed.     Cost for entree & appetizers shared @ the table: $16-20 out the door. For Vegas, that's a great deal for a sit-in restaurant with some amount of class and zero strippers/half naked individuals :)  I will definitely return to Maggiano's LV and hope to duplicate this prior positive dining experiences."							
37SQU136V74Y8ETJQIAVULR52VJ116	"To say the employees here are rude would be putting it mildly.   I come here frequently, not because it is the best McDonald's, but rather because it is the closest McDonald's. The food here is okay at best, for a McDonald's. It's certainly better than either location on Chandler Boulevard. However, my major complaint is that no matter what time of day I come or if I go drive through versus inside, not a single employee thanks me for my business.   It especially irks me because as someone who has worked customer service, I always make a point of thanking the people who are providing me the service. I don't think it's unreasonable to expect the same courtesy from people where I choose to spend my money, thus providing them a job.  Apart from the blatantly rude service, this location seems to have a problem with employees never emptying trash cans. Especially at the drive through. I can't count how many times I've come, even in the morning, and that trashcan is overflowing. I'm not sure if it's a problem for the health department or not, but I can tell you that it's really disgusting to see birds and flies hang around the trashcan right in front of where I'm picking up my food. Food and trash literally overflow. It's a similar case inside the restaurant, especially at the cans near the bathroom.  Overall this is an okay McDonald's if you just need one that's close by, but don't expect it to be a great McDonald's."							
34O39PNDK6ONEHASQ9IZ6OMRS54BRV	"To start with, please notice that all four people who have given this restaurant 1-Star reviews are friendless Orangeheads!  With that out of the way... I stopped in to this very nice place for lunch today joined by Mike C., & ordered a Monterey Club Sandwich, which comes with a choice of soup or salad for a side.  Of the three soup choices available, I chose ""Chicken Enchilada"", & it was TERRIFIC!!  Then came the sandwich.  It arrived on a big pair of very fresh & tasty slices of multi whole grain bread, cut in half.  Inside was turkey, bacon, avocado, lettuce, tomato & mayonnaise.  It was also SUPER GOOD!    Monterey Club Sandwich & soup $8.49.  Plenty to eat, excellent value, excellent table service, 5 Stars!     :-))  (Hours:  Weekdays 6:30 to 2:30; Saturday & Sunday 7:00 to 2:30.  Both Breakfast & Lunch anytime.)"							
360ZO6N6J1ZDT8I3NH8MTJXRYI29MV	"Tony B-  I just want to set the record straight.  Maggiano's is owned by a private company that was started in 1991 which also owns On the Border, Macaroni Grill, and Chili's. Maggiano's Restaurant has had the same owner since 1996. There has been no ownership change. If you had a bad experience, Maggiano's thrive's on customer satisfaction and will make sure that your next experience is a happy and memorable one. Thanks and don't forget to mention this article and mention the banquet sales department when you return!!  Stephany Las Vegas"							
3909MD9T2ZXOIUH395KVQ7ETSE6FE4	"Too dark booth for our party of 5 began a disappointing dining experience. Caprese salad & Proscuito Bruschetta appetizers. Caprese w flavorless mozzarella.  Our pasta main course was undercooked, although every dish had sat under the heat lamps/salamander too long. So, tough ravioli, penne (wheat) undercooked but meatball was pretty good. Since we were guests, we did not send anything back. I guess it's just difficult for a well established and popular restaurant to consistently produce good food. But that just doesn't make any sense does it?  What makes more sense is that they get so many customers they'll likely never see again, quality doesn't matter. Good thing there is Yelp."							
3I4E7AFQ2KF6CFLWIQ0B4R6MOV9TJA	"Took a recent trip to vegas and after walking around starving me and my bf decided to try out Maggiano's.  The ambiance is beautiful with rich furnishings and amazing views of the strip. Bread is brought to the table with butter, but there is also olive oil on the table if you prefer to dip with that. We started with an appetizer of tomato caprese that was very good, next we shared the smaller version of the spinach salad that was amazing (bacon, pine nuts, super yummy dressing etc), and finally we split a plate of the chicken parmesan that was a large portion, so big in fact we ended up taking the rest to go in a box. In total, those 3 dishes 1 water and 1 coke was $37 which I thought was very reasonable. The sever was friendly, prompt and attentive. There was also a man with a guitar that would sing you a song at the time if you would like. Overall I liked the mood of the restaurant, the romantic feel, delicious food and wonderful service. No complaints."							
3FI30CQHVKZUSYC8YLF1VTVVWIQ6BS	"Took awhile for our server to come take our orders...only ordered a Barcelona sandwich and everyone's order came before mine...even other people who got there after us...my sandwich ended up taking 45 minutes to come out to me...and it didn't have the cheese that the menu said it was supposed to have so I sent it back to get cheese and when it came back out half the bread was missing and replaced with a piece of sandwich bread. Asked to speak to the manager who was not even there so the head chef came out and was telling us how they are usually slow on Sundays and ran out out a lot of stuff, I told him I was not paying for my meal...turns out he comped our whole meal. Never going there again"							
3TKXBROM5TQG315LOE17QK4DDEUJIK	"Toros is excellent i cant believe I see negative reviews on this place for one food is amazing.Filled with a bunch of flavor,went to dinner with my wife and our server a younger guy i believe his name was omar he was very attentive and a blast ,very easy going and very knowledgeable about the menu gave us some awesome food choices which we decided to order,so glad we did we started off with bacon wrapped stuffed dates they were amazingly delicious,ox tail was amazing,and the croquet's were very good as well ,we ordered half roasted chicken which is amazingly good , and finished off with apple banana bread pudding which our server suggested to us and again best meal we've had.Ill be coming back more then twice a week thanks to the food ,atmosphere, and the service."							
3P4C70TRMRX820NQ1BDHLN4P2Q6LGV	"Tried the Saltimbicca chicken and it was like nothing I have ever tasted. The dish was full of flavor (sage and other herbs) tender (perhaps pounded?) in a perfect mix of sauce. Wow! I normally go with the tenderloin medallions but glad that I ventured from the beef route. Oh, and the bread--addictive, so delicious."							
3M93N4X8HK35XF8HTQVLUMA0MCWJSC	"Tried this place for the first time this morning and it exceeded all ny expectations! I'm not usually the diner type, but the quality of food and commitment top great service will have me back here on a regular basis."							
3BVS8WK9Q0BALI790MOQSWL059KIBX	"Two stars for the low quality of food.  My friends and i decided to spend our last dinner in vegas at Maggianos. It was a short walk from our hotel and we wanted some REAL food after nights of bingeing on whatever we can get our hands on after the clubs. It is definitely on the expensive side where a half order of pasta will be around 11-17 bucks while a full order will cost you 20+.   They do encourage family style for tables of 4+, but i think the cheapest family style was still around 20 a person.   Out of the four of us we ordered: spaggetti with meatballs, lobster alfredo, fettucini alfredo and linguine with clams. All of the dishes were tasteless. I had to drown my linguine with claims with half the bottle of salt  and all my friends did too. Maybe the chef forgot about the salt??  Idk, although the pasta were tasteless, the seafood was fresh and the bread was pretty good too.   Meh, I've experienced better is the perfect description for this place."							
3YD0MU1NC2H8DOLLBHKX6WBL9BOA7Z	"Unpretentious, simply classy, affordable, good food.   If you want a little Italian while in Vegas but don't want all the hoopla this is your place. It's just like the great Italian spot you and your wife always go when you're craving a delicious chicken parm.  Recommend."							
3MVY4USGB63924OBB8ALILV09X6ISY	"Upretensist spisested, med store porsjoner og god vin. Er spesielt glad i Coppola Diamond collection !"							
336OE47KI207VRPKUKJ5UZOFNCYVWN	"Very consistent place for breakfast with the kids.  Pancakes are always terrific, and I like that I can order a single pancake (they're HUGE; if you're eating a stack of these, be prepared for a nap).  Servers are always super-friendly, and very attentive if the place isn't jammed.  Kids' meals are a terrific deal.   Nice that they have flavored creamers to go with the coffee.  Not as funky & flavorful as Matt's Big Breakfast, but no wait, and a lot cheaper."							
3TZDZ3Y0JSMGXJWEUVPO9R9O07791N	Very crowded! Go to the one on Central. Way better IHOP.							
3X878VYTIEY39F2TMX6PKXMC6R27FA	"Very good comfort food with all the regular Italian fare you're accustomed to. This isn't going to be anything out of the ordinary, but if you're looking for a good-solid place to take a group while you're visiting the Strip, this is it. Great views and patio seating is available."							
3X52SWXE0XLBWIJK33O0470Q25ICW5	"Very good food and even better service. The only thing to criticize is that they always play classic rock. I love classic rock just as much as the next guy, but the music doesn't quite fit in with the place. The music zaps the energy right out of a place that could have a really awesome atmosphere."							
3O2Y2UIUCQAR4U9D5RVYO2RYCB2FKO	"Very good food, excellent service.  Loved that they have gluten free pasta choices.  Our whole party was  happy with their entrees.  The lobster carbonara was especially tasty.  Lost one star for wine list.  Not as robust as we'd hoped."							
3ROUCZ907FA40Y7L2M6HIDHLOH3OO3	"Very good food. Nothing mind blowing, but a solid Italian meal. Kind of similar in quality to Bucca di Beppo.  We would go back."							
3QD8LUVX4XE5MXFVYYXESK8NJQ35XK	"Very good, fresh salad. Chicken perfectly spiced."							
3RHLQY6EDTK9S86ETTDSTLZH3CVD4K	"Very nice restaurant. I was trying to stay away from buffets and this place was conveniently located across the street from our hotel. The host and waitress, not so nice, but the food made up for it. I had to change the time of the reservation time once because we were running late and I guess she didn't like that. The waitress took our order and forgot about us for a while.  The food was really good, it had a really good taste. It comes in really big portions so you can share or just take the rest home.  Prices are reasonable."							
3CRWSLD91KKG0VM9P6R4Q9SGTHOOMO	"Very predictable and reliable.  My husband and I have dined at Maggiano's in San Jose (Santana Row) near our house several times and also in Orlando Florida.  We decided for our last night in Vegas we wanted something affordable, reliable and relatively quick- we had show tickets and had gotten back late from our tour.  The Concierge at Encore called to get us a reservation and we were seated right at our reservation time (we got there early just in case), but we had plenty of time without feeling rushed.  We ordered the mozzarella appetizer, which was delicious.  Husband has his green salad and of course the fresh bread with oil and balsamic vinegar is a huge hit!   An affordable bottle of wine to share and for entrees, my fish loving husband actually ordered the beef tips!  He said they were wonderful and they came with mashed potatoes with shoestring onion ring crisps- bit he was too full to eat the sides.   I ordered the fettuccine alfredo and it was delicious!   We passed again on dessert- simply no room because the food during dinner was plentiful!       The location is very central- right on the corner of the strip across from the Wynn hotel- which was perfect for us considering we were staying at Encore and had tickets to the show at Wynn.    We would definitely go back again!"							
3YD0MU1NC2H8DOLLBHKX6WBL9BPA70	"Very tasty food, professional and very courteous waitress. Chicken parmigiano was excellent, strong drinks. Highly recommended."							
3TX9T2ZCB9HO4BUUVH88F51BBN5WZP	"Very very good food, only tried a couple dishes butt they were outstanding and very fresh. The pasta seems to be made from scratch which is always a plus and the sauces are not overwhelming. Very good"							
37PGLWGSJTMBELB36Z1JRZ4QS3TKIJ	Very yummy chicken pita:) clean and great  friendly service							
3T6SSHJUZFQK8QLF6WG7EJPD0Z4II6	"Visited the day before New Year's Eve. I think they were just really busy. Our food didn't arrive for 35 minutes & our drinks were never refilled. My server seemed so busy we could hardly gain his attention to ask for a refill & to ask for an additional place setting.  The service shouldn't take away from the food. However, when you pay $150 for a meal you expect great service. They failed on that front.   Stay away during busy times. I'm sure they're much better during less busy times."							
3421H3BM9AXNS0CIKKVUDR5AUO79JR	"Visiting Maggianos was one of the best experiences I had in Vegas.  We found it on Yelp from the glowing reviews and they pretty much all held true.  The service was friendly, the food was ENORMOUS and subtle in flavor.  We vacuumed up everything.  The wine was fine and they served us hot bread rolls with olive oil and balsamic vinegar before our appetizers.  All in all a way classy italian place for EXTREMELY cheap.  I couldn't believe I had such a delicious meal in an elegant environment AND wine for only $20!  Highly recommended."							
3FTID4TN8LE8OR8QVHZNSNBT7MXLYU	"Viva' Las Vegas, was my destination this weekend. And decided to take the girlfriend and parents to dinner here. I always enjoy this place. Did the family style, and if you never done family style food, well get on it. Its fun.   Great food, from appetizers to entree's and also the desserts.. Everyone agreed the Mom's Lasagna was amazing, the Gnocchi & Italian Sausage was incredible , the  Crab & Shrimp Cannelloni was to die for, and Linguine & Clams, Red or White Clam Sauce was out of this site.   So heads up if you do go, maybe call ahead of time, its a super busy place. We totally lucked out and sat outside since it was nice evening. But inside is very nice. Do you need to dress up? I would say at least wear a collar shirt guys..   Our waitress for the evening was very helpful and very fun. The only problem it took a while for us to get our appetizers, which she apoligized all night long. We didn't mind, we had our drinks in hand and having a good time. But other then that another great experience in the book.. Hope you guys enjoy. Because the food is amazing.."							
3CIS7GGG65ZD1CET4UFUC7FW21LEU2	"Vorneweg - das Ambiente ist klasse, der Service sehr gut, und das Essen ist auch hervorragend. Man kann hier in einer gem_tlichen Atmosph_re einen schnen Abend verbringen. Der Service ist hilfsbereit, immer zu Stelle und entspricht allen positiven Vorurteilen. Zum Essen aber einen Hinweis: Es schmeckt ausgezeichnet aber es macht sehr satt, die Gre der Portionen ist landestypisch. Die Menge des K_ses auf den Gerichten auch und ebenso die Menge der Schokolade auf dem Tiramisu. Vielleicht ein wenig _berladen f_r europ_ischen Geschmack - aber keinesfalls schlecht. Mit landestypisch ist hier _brigens nicht typisch italienisch gemeint..."							
31S7M7DAGG6C759WLBCOK6JESKETLC	"Wait was terrible. It was Friday night after 10 pm and the place was busy. We were a party of four.  Our flatbread was cold and placed on a menu on the table, dishes not cleared, no butter or oil offered. Brought entree before salad. When we asked for more bread, he brought 2 pcs for four people  Not sure if he was mad we didn't order drinks or wine?"							
3LVTFB9DE5YJTX33TGLD293JCWTQGP	"Waiter suggested special - chicken lasagna- Alfredo sauce almost non existent but dish still good. Ordered the second special ravioli with lemon ""cream"" sauce - it arrived and the sauce was like warm milk - very watered down - sent it back and split the lasagne."							
307L9TDWJY8XWOENI9MCFLJ53G23N8	"Wanting to go to a Chinese restaurant that wasn't a buffet, I stopped by China Chili in Central Phoenix. The inside is a vast room filled with beautiful chandelier lighting and stunning Chinese artwork. Looked pretty fancy for the price, so it's a good choice to take someone special with the apperance you have money. I asked for a small table in the back corner to eat in peace among the sparse group of younger and older people present.   Menu was quite large, with a deep selection of various choices. I was feeling seafood tonight, so I went with the Kung Pao Calamari which according to the menu is spicy and hot. Faster than I could say Toa chie, the dish arrived. No joke, the server walked into the kitchen and the food came out in about 2 minutes. That's insane and impressive.   The Kung Pao Calamari in presentation was great and looked delicious on the oval plate. Red, green bell peppers, cucumbers, peanuts and of course the calamari. Scooped up some calamari with various bits of vegetables and upon first impression it was quite good, although the calamari was fairly rubbery more than what I'm used to. The chewing went on longer than I was hoping. Good nonetheless and acceptable. Portion of food was more than adequate with a side of rice as is customary. I did not sense any spiciness to the food which I found disappointing as I do love a little kick in my seafood. I'd honestly like to try something else next time I come here. I sense the potential here.  Overall, China Chili for the price and the atmosphere it's worth it. I would actually rate this place if I was able, close to 3 and half stars as the food wasn't as dynamic as the more upscale authentic places I've been to but then again I didn't expect that either. If you want Chinese food that has a little more class that doesn't kill your paycheck check out China Chili."							
3WKGUBL7SZ2SQKU66ABGCY7MCLY4LS	"Was it just because I was really hungry, or was the food really that good?  My wife and I visited Las Vegas for our wedding anniversary back in January.  Upon driving in from San Diego, we went shopping, drove around a bit and by the time we checked into our hotel, we were famished.  Look out the window and what did we see?  Maggianos, never been there, it is close, let's give it a whirl.  It was crowded!!  45 minute wait?  Forget it, let's go to the bar and perfect 2 seats on the corner.  Bartender was very pleasant and even humored me when I had to share a picture on my phone that I had received earlier in the day.  ""Drinking rum before 10am makes you a pirate NOT an alcoholic""  I can't even remember what my wife had, but I didn't care.  I do know that she liked it though.  I had the spaghetti with meatball in meat sauce.  Holy smokes.  Spaghetti is probably my goto favorite food, but this was wow!  Wait...there is no Maggiano's in San Diego?  Nooooo!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!"							
3126F2F5F8J0976XN8G021SXUKTEP6	"We always call in for take out and the order is always ready with in 10 minutes. Great, fresh and hot is the best way to describe this place. Over 4 years of coming here we have only been disappointed once. Not a bad record."							
302U8RURJZHH8XG62JSIYGBOU0UNVO	"We always end up eating here at least once every time someone comes to visit us. :) My husband is a big fan of italian food, so it works out great. He can never get sick of spaghetti, but i like trying different things... chicken alfredo or chicken marsala seem to be my main dishes :)   The location is perfect! Shop a little til you get hungry, then go to Maggiano's. Or eat first, then shop... either way, its a win-win. There might be quite a wait if you go around 6 or 7pm, but if you go there for lunch or something it works out perfect."							
3TY2U1TEB7QCYCPR6WM72LJDQTJJJW	"We are locals in Las Vegas, we get tickets to concerts at the Orleans, so tgi's is the logical place to eat. Not the best, service there is not very good, it is hit and miss, sometimes we get great service sometimes horrible service! We went there on Nov. 10th for the Kenny Wayne Shepherd concert, the hostess sat us and took our drink orders and only brought water, not the beer my hubby order. We had to order from a waitress, did that got our drinks and appitizer, but hubby ordered the garlic shrimp that was supposed to be served on risotta style rice, uh what is that?? We thought risotta, not so..just burnt rice, in fact it was all burnt. We had no time to re order as we had a concert to get to. Just be sure when you go, order a burger or basic food, get there with plenty of time in case you bad service. Don't expect too much!"							
33EEIIWHK7N2BUTYIBKZ2A6TZBHVQJ	"We are so excited that there is a neighborhood bar to go to besides John Cutters! I don't have a penis, don't gamble nor do I play golf-yet I get great service unlike the ""sister restaurant"" next-door ... Ronald and Rheanna are such professional and friendly bartenders who are all we could ever hope for!!! Manager Steve is great also. People who complain about food have so many other places to go within a five mile radius - happy trails to you all! We are very content at Toros. The happy hour is great-I hope they keep it !!!"							
3MJ9GGZYO3M1RNOF5532A5UDYV2A2J	We ate here because it was across the street from St. Joseph's hospital where our baby was in intensive care. Had the Parma Hash. It was amazing!!! I love the server Tomara! She has an awesome personality. She noticed my hospital bracelet and we told her about our baby and she was sweet enough to say a prayer for him. I would definitely recommend this restaurant. It has a friendly happy environment.							
3QQUBC64ZEU9CML12YT0M189AB2NXR	"We ate here with a party of 10. The service was great. The food was good. We ordered baked sausage ziti, ravioli, lasagna, and pork chops. It was also a walk away from Ti. They also have a great happy hour for cocktails. I would return to this place for sure!"							
3R16PJFTS37H6ECOLAZFXYU7NLTK45	We ate there during our last trip to Vegas. I loved their eggplant Parmesan. Nick our server was great. We ate outside on the patio. The service was great. The manager even stopped by to ask us how our food was. I loved their mist outside to cool us during the hot weather. They don't offer the take one home meal like all other Maggiano's. I could've used it. Nevertheless a great experience Highly recommended.							
3TKSOBLOHLW0YAT3UCW969HNAJ1BBI	"we came by for lunch after checking out. i wanted nachos and mama wanted a salad. i figured this would be an ideal spot to facilitate those needs.  the hostess who sat us was not very pleasant. she tried to seat us at the bar section, on a bar table. mind you, we have our luggage with us and didn't ask to be seated at the bar. when i asked her for a dining room booth, she looked less than thrilled to be burdened with this task. she may have even rolled her eyes behind her glasses.   our server was a nicer individual. we ordered nachos and mama had a cobb salad. mama gets picky with her orders sometimes. this time she didn't get ""too"" picky. she did ask for NO bleu cheese though. we thought it was simple enough. i also asked for a lemon for my water. needless to say, i point those items out because they were not accomplished. the nachos were good and mama tolerated her salad. we ordered dessert, the brownie with ice cream. that was real good.   would've gone with 3 stars, cause the server was nice. but, the hostess and the missed items make me have to drop one. call it 2.5"							
3ZURAPD2883PYTNRXHPGJNVZ3521F7	"We came for a late dinner tonight. I wasn't expecting much service-wise from prior reviews, but we had a great waiter and our food came out lightening-fast.   The roasted peppers were delicious, as were the crab stuffed padron peppers. My husband thought the authentic Spanish sausage was unique. I ended the meal with the rice pudding - delicious! Overall, we liked the food, albeit slightly overpriced (but not necessarily for the neighborhood), and the service was fantastic. Even the manager (owner?) came over to see how things went.  I also had the $6 glass white sangria. It was yummy and did not seem overpriced.   We will be back and are happy to welcome Toros to the neighborhood."							
3M7OI89LVY4D234ECLBW6D1DE3Q6CZ	"We came here last night for dinner.   We were greeted and sat immediately. The hostess was very friendly and our waiter was very attentive.   They don't have a large portion to choose from on their menu for tapas - but all of the tapas are half off on Monday's, which is super nice.  Also, the wine list isn't very large. But they have a full bar for everything else.   We had a fairly decent number of dishes - Angus Sliders Stuffed peppers Artichokes Filet Scallops Asparagus Lava cake  Everything was okay. The garlic aioli...if you don't want insanely strong garlic in your mouth for hours, steer clear.  Most of the dishes were fairly bland and there wasn't much to them.  Everything came out VERY quickly - the waiter said they don't let anything sit in the window and it's all made fresh, which was bizarre because a few of the dishes he brought out were barely luke warm. So, I don't believe that was the case. It seemed in a way that he was doing his best to convince us that the food was good.  He was a great waiter, but the food...it was mediocre.   I can't see myself coming back again...I like good food, especially when I'm paying for it. ;)"							
32W3UF2EZO1ZNG00TXIH9FHZICK4CC	"We Chose the Make A Wish meal for two. Enjoyed crab cakes as an appetizer, happy hour-Long Island Iced tea. My partner enjoyed pepper corn crusted sirloin, I had crusted Tilapia. Creme Brle and Apple Carmel sauce w/ vanilla ice cream. FABULOUS . Come get us we can't move! Enjoy. PS Ask for Seidi's tables..she's so cool."							
3QGTX7BCHPIURSFAZGLZP5OYRQ15ZH	"We decided to stop here and have lunch. Boy am I glad that we did! Maggiano's was delicious!! I really regret not taking pictures of our food but I was enjoying it so much that I was too busy stuffing my face and didn't think to pull out the camera.   I'm a total soup girl, so after hearing the day's selection of soups, I decided on a cup of roasted mushroom soup. When it arrived my jaw dropped. I asked for a cup (or small ...whatever) and it arrived in a huge bowl!! The portions were huge! I even waited and double checked with our server that they didn't make a mistake and give me the bigger size bowl of soup and she said ""nope, that's the small one"". Well, the soup was delicious. It was full of mushrooms in a cream base and was sooooo yummyyy!!!  My mom ordered the ""small"" Spinach Salad and that was delicious as well. Never had roasted red peppers in a spinach salad and it surprisingly gave great flavor with the smoked bacon, crumbled gorgonzola, sweet onions and toasted pine nuts. We would have been just fine with our soup and salad but little did we know that the portions were going to be so huge!  Okay, entree time...we both went with sandwhiches. I had the Jumbo Lump Crabcake Sandwhich (via their menu on the website...""Crab cake on a brioche bun with arugula, tomato and crispy onion strings and mustard mayonnaise. Served with parmesan chips"") and my mom had the Seared Salmon Sandwhich (which is not listed on the menu online for some odd reason). THOSE WERE THE 2 BEST DAMN SANDWHICHES I'VE EVER HAD!!!! OMGGGG!! Sooo yummyyyy!!! I think it's funny that we were at an Italian restaurant and didn't have pasta but I am so glad at our choices because the food was soooo delicious!  We were so stuffed from our soup and salad that we each only ate half of our sandwhiches and went back to our hotel room with our leftovers, happily! LOL! We were very happy with our lunch from Maggiano's and will be making it a regular stop on future visits to Vegas.  Although I am in the Bay and heard there's a Maggiano's down in San Jose, I rarely head down to the South Bay so I doubt I'll be visiting that one. I highly suggest the location in Las Vegas!!   p.s. Excellent service as well! Oh yeah, and it was a lovely day so we opted to dine outside and it was very nice! The weather was perfect!"							
3WGCNLZJKFOS099V6BUQVNSERSM1DW	"We dined at Toro's Spanish Kitchen on a Sunday afternoon. The restaurant was not very crowded. The dining room offers a choice of high top and regular height tables. Also, several patio tables with umbrellas.  Our server was friendly and helpful. Service began with a basket of bread. Orders are submitted to the kitchen electronically table side. The orders were delivered fairly quickly.  The Angus Sliders (3 to an order) were tasty and have a smoke paprika flavor. If you look at the inside of the burger it may seem to be under cooked but it is actually the paprika that's mixed with the meat. The Sizzling Chili Shrimp (5 to an order) are very good. Use the bread to soak up the sauce, YUM.  Sweet Piquillo Peppers stuffed with Crab Meat are delicious. They come 2 to an order and are served in a tomato sauce. This is another winner. A pitcher of White Sangria was reasonably priced and had a nice fruit flavor.  The menu has a good variety of items which calls for a few return trips. Toro's Spanish Kitchen is a nice addition and adds variety to the dining choices in the Summerlin Community."							
3FW4EL5A3L4CMKTBSQAN4NBFM7B225	"We dined here last night with a party of 10.  Ordered the family style dinner and were very impressed.  Brandon took very good care of us the whole night.  We were never rushed and the food just keep coming.  The chopped salad was great along with the stuffed mushrooms.   Dinner was eggplant parmesan, salmon, chicken picata and sausage with gnocchi which all were excellent.  One of our diners had some dietary issues and they were VERY attentive to her.  Dessert was amazing my favorite being the apple pie.  Everyone in our party was very impressed!"							
37VUR2VJ6A5IVH3H6FZFBHAW6SA1CW	"We don't have a TGI Friday's in my hometown, so my boyfriend and I specifically planned to visit this location on our recent trip to Vegas.  We were seated right away, which is always nice.  We then waited at our table for 10-15mins for anyone to even greet us or smile our direction.  When our server finally arrived, the FIRST words out of her mouth were ""I'm exhausted.""  She then proceeded to complain to us about her last table as an excuse as to why we had to wait so long just to get waters.  We had enough time to decide what to order as we waited so long.  I decided to try the special the hostess told me about: steak and lobster for $13.99.  What I didn't know is that it was on a time limit.  The server had the nerve to look at her watch after making us wait 15 minutes and tell me I ""barely made it"" in time to order that.  I also order a cocktail at this time.  After waiting another 10 minutes, she finally brought my sangria followed by another 15-20 minute wait for our entrees.  Let me tell you.  This was the MOST unappetizing meal I've ever had to eat.  I am not usually a complainer--even when I'm starving I eat some pretty crazy foods.  The lobster was not ""de-turded (for lack of a better word)"" and my medium rare steak was too tough to chew.  We did speak to the store manager who willingly comp'ed us some items, but I left underwhelmed and still hungry after not being able to bring myself to finish my meal."							
34HEO7RUG6AIV750KVI3BD2LANJRAG	"We eat here every time in Vegas.  It very consistent.  It is very good for large groups as it serves the traditional large sizes.  Service is always good, food is always good.  My noodles were a little over cooked this time so I knocked them down to a 4 star otherwise they are 5 star all the way."							
34YWR3PJ28Q6RQTU1SR2BPCW2ISX0R	"We ended up getting reservations here for our dinner, the last time we were in vegas; and I am glad we did.  The service was great! I want to say our servers name was nestor? but I could be wrong, either way... great service. we had the margherita flatbread to start (delicious) and our server recommended a  dush to me which was amazing.  it was nicknamed ""grown up mac n cheese"" but it was nothing like mac and cheese.  I rarely ever give a place 2 thumbs up or five star etc etc... but the food and service were amazing."							
3N7PQ0KLI55T2I1APAJTPYPWPO1E3U	"We enjoyed the meal greatly as a late afternoon dinner with my sweetheart.  I ordered the Make-A-Wish special (for 2) with Lump Crab Cakes as a yummy appetizer), Peppercorn coated Sirloin with twice baked potatoes, a Long Island Ice Tea (Happy Hour special for only $6) & Creme Brulee as dessert.  My sweetie ordered the crusted Tilapia as her entree with an apple dessert covered in a caramel sauce. They may be a chain restaurant,  but they are of excellent quality on every point!  Seidi (from Estonia) was our server and she is totally fabulous!  Everyone from the hostess that seated us, the gentleman that brought us water and prepped our booth to the wait staff was friendly, and seem genuinely interested that we had the best experience possible."							
3RDTX9JRTYHU85BGJB6XA1013T779I	"We got off to a questionable start as we were sat several minutes after our reservation time.  It was not a deal breaker, but it was annoying.  Our server was prompt and friendly.  The bread is very good.  It is hard not to fill up on it before your meal comes.  We ordered a few appetizers for the table.  I tried the mozzarella marinara.  It was surprisingly good.  Most places you can tell the mozzarella was pulled from the freezer right before it was fried.  The mozzarella here had good flavor, and the portions are good sized.  To start off my meal I ordered the side portion of the Maggiano's Salad.  I always enjoy this salad.  The house dressing has good flavor.  The blue cheese and bacon add great flavors too.  The portion is large.  For my main course I ordered the veal Parmesan.  The portion is huge.  It comes with a side of spaghetti as well.  The veal is ok as far as flavor is concerned.  I have had better, but it was fine."							
3M0556243S0SC0UG24NEGU82666FNS	"We got there around 10:15 pm and we decided to wait for the Happy Hour at 11pm. We got Estrella beer (which is really giod),Seafood Soup and meatball with fries fries for the kids. All this before 11pm. The soup was ok, 2 mussels, 1 clam, 1 shrimp and few pieces of some white fish that tasted really good.   After 11 we got the Chix Wings, Pan Boli, Saffron Chicken and Fried Calamari. The chix wings where really good. The calamari was better. The batter stayed crispy after 10 mins, which is weird to find a batter like that. Pan boli it was great for the soup. 2 pcs. of baguette toasted with jamon serrano, manchego and EVOO.    The Saffron chicken a disapointment. No flavor, no seasoning, no saffron. Looked like a turmeric puree on top of chicken.  The service was ok, but there was problems between customers and the bartender. Some people left so disapointed that even the manager couldnt fix whatever issue they where having.   Maybe I'll be back but this town is getting so full of Tapas Bars that is getting boring."							
37PGLWGSJTMBELB36Z1JRZ4QS3UKIK	"We had a bottle of Malbec to start off, we enjoyed the Chicken Parmesan and Chicken  Marsala.  The bread was hot and the sever was outstanding!"							
359AP8GAGG0W63IJVVGOCR199EAC74	We had a great dinner and drinks. The food tasted great.							
3JHB4BPSFKP4ENGVFAF3ASHW8JZ9QI	"We had a great experience this week at the bar with Ricardo.  He made some great menu suggestions (chile verde pork plate and tamales) and spun up some delicious drinks.  The salsas and dip (trio which comes with the chips) were amazing, and the atmosphere was friendly and nice.  We'll be back!"							
3OYHVNTV5TELA7M64UEOBW0C4CTOKJ	We had high expectations based on the reviews but were very disappointed. Calamari was extremely salty and overcooked (dark brown). Lasagna was cold in the middle. Seafood was strong flavored suggesting it was fresh.  Paste was overcooked and mushy.  Bread was stale.  Price was way out of range from quality ($100 for two people).							
3OCZWXS7ZONAM3Y6KFUQHQD0CHSL5D	"We had lunch here on our first day in Vegas.  The food was excellent, the service was fast and courteous and the atmosphere was really nice.  Nothing was outrageous expensive and although we went there during the day, the view of the Wynn and that end of the Strip was nice.  I was told that this is a chain, but we don't have any in Massachusetts and I never would have guessed... Definitely a great option for italian if you are in town!"							
3S8A4GJRD3J91CAE3261W5P2ZA5V6M	"We had lunch there today. We had peach-pomegranite lemonade. It was so good, we got some to go. We shared the stuffed mushroom appetizer and shared the chicken Florentine. Both dishes were awesome! Our server was friendly and did not care in the least that we were not having alcohol for lunch or that we were sharing in order not to feel stuffed when we left.   We have eaten at Maggiano's in Atlanta a couple of times and the service and food was not this good.  We would definitely eat here again."							
3IKDQS3DQEGTVNZFEMKL3GRINULCIZ	We had our wedding reception at Maggianos on 8.10.13 after our wedding ceremony at Wynn Las Vegas.  It was 5+ STARS!  They took excellent care of us and we planned everything from out of town (we live in LA).  The reception could not have been more perfect and everyone at Maggianos made it so easy for us!  Our banquet captain Jessie Mzoughi was incredible!  I highly recommend them for your reception or any event!							
3XBXDSS888ZJOMIGQLDL994K5G3LXO	"We had our wedding reception here on August 3rd...IT WAS PERFECT!! The food was amazing, and there was LOTS of it! Our guests were thrilled. We had 120 guests, so we took up all of the banquet space. The dance floor was packed the entire time thanks to the DJ they recommended to us. We also used their vendors for cake and photo booth.   Sabrina was very accommodating, and quick to respond to my questions via email or phone.   I cannot recommend this place enough as a wedding reception venue. It looks good without any decor, even! Especially for Wynn brides - it is very convenient."							
309D674SHZ1J8FL98CS4HTN5S41CBQ	"We had our wedding reception here.  Let me tell you, after shopping the hotels for receptions we knew this was the place for us.  We spoke with Marc, the event person and he showed us their private rooms.  Since we had about 90 people attending, it was very affordable.  The menu we choose was a family style 3-course meal with appetizers.  Since we had some older people attending the family style service was great.  It was all you can eat, but they served everything at the tables so no buffet type of lines.  Everything was done through email and a few phone calls and it was done.  Cassie, the second in charge for catering was extremely helpful.  Shop around, but the food is second to none and the service staff during the reception were very professional and friendly.  If you have any type of event in Vegas, check this place out.  You can't beat the prices and the food is awesome!!"							
30EV7DWJTVBQ565J8DTL34TWHR86Y7	"We had out-of-town friends who took us there.  GADS!  How I wish we had visited this place on our own!  The grub is great.  The prices are great.  The service is great.  The out-of-town guests were great.    As usual, my wife continues to be great.   This place is really worth a visit."							
31MBOZ6PAO7VLO7LZPHYVWJA4YELCL	"We have had good experiences here and not so great ones...it is, after all a chain restaurant and lacks the personalization we prefer. The lasagna is the highlight of the menu. I am not a huge lasagna fan so I often find myself trying some type of seafood dish, which I have found they over-sauce. The service was decent but we prefer to pick up here rather than dine-in, as it has a stuffy feel to the atmosphere.   Pros: Good take-out, yummy lasagna  Cons: Ambiance, seafood dishes"							
39O6Z4JLX2DMKRUA4PFRWI2MWE4XVI	"We hosted our Wedding Reception at Maggiano's Las Vegas. It was the perfect place for our wedding reception! Cassy was extremely helpful and always responded to my emails in a timely fashion. I also appreciated how she genuinely cared that I was getting the most for my money. She made great suggestions about how to spend the money toward our room minimum. The workers at Maggiano's did a fantastic job setting up our reception. It looked even better than I had imagined it would. There was SO MUCH food and it was all delicious! My guests all loved the food and some said it was the best food they had ever had at a wedding. This venue is a one stop shop, they referred me to a great DJ, bakery, florist, and limo service too! Thank you so much to everyone at Maggiano's!"							
3JHB4BPSFKP4ENGVFAF3ASHW8JY9QH	"We like coming here for one reason excellent service.  We are regulars at this place and we really appreciate the customer service from all the managers.  In the past they have helped us so many times.  Kristen was our waitress today, she's nice.   She knows what we drink by heart and will always take care of us.  She really knows the meaning of customer satification.  While we were here watching the NFL Jets vs. Pats game.  A tall bartender that saw a customer left his suitcase and he tried to get it back to him.  How nice was that?  Hopefully that man remembered where he left it..  I'm sure we'll be back for more half priced apps, I even signed up for a stripes card.  In the bar area Mon-Sat from 5 PM - 7 PM & 9 PM - 2 AM is half priced apps. On Sunday are half priced apps ALL DAY.  Sign up for their Give Me More Stripes account, opt for the emails & text messages if you can.  I get amazing email offers every so often. I also fill out the surveys on the receipt for an $8 app."							
38DCH97KHHITKZT41M6GZMVZ4OBJQN	"We love Maggiano's!!!  They have a great happy hour during the week and the bar area is relaxed and quiet.  There is an old man who looks like the Six Flags guy walking around playing violin and he is the coolest old little dude ever!!  Our favorites are the stuffed mushrooms, spinach salad (amazing dressing), and the tortelluca dish.  Everythig we have every eaten here is tasty.  You can't go wrong!!"							
3421H3BM9AXNS0CIKKVUDR5AUO69JQ	"We love Maggianos and eat here every time were in Las Vegas. The atmosphere is as great as the food and the pricing . I would highly recommend making a reservation, we use opentable."							
3UEDKCTP9V6EP1U7N8XM0AEHENJK7P	We love Maggianos Little Italy.  We used to go to the one at South Coast Plaza it is awesome! But now that we have moved we are closer to Las Vegas Maggianos is at Fashion Mall across from Wynn.  They do a great job even being crowded! Food and service are great! You can park right under the mall and there is an elevator to take  you to italian heaven!							
3YGE63DIN8DR2QO4RNVG96YPTGM0W1	"We love this place!  I work at ASU Skysong and my coworkers and I frequent this shop for lunch.  The service is always great, the food is good and the baklava is to die for!  We also have them cater for our office on occasion and they have never disappointed.  Definitely a good place to check out."							
37G6BXQPLQ1L9J7CNLVP26I7ZGFEQX	"We love this place! When compared to the other places in Phoenix, China Chili is at the top.  My favorite is the Black Pepper Sizzling Beef. Pork Imperial Sauce is also a favorite. Service is good and friendly."							
36MUZ9VAE6IRKA37IZP527B8G1QEDS	"We love to come here daily for a large Diet-Coke and a fruit parfait. The drive thru can be a bit slow at times, but they always cook their hash browns to the perfect crisp."							
3VMHWJRYHVWXOU8K4AANEWZ08KGFXC	"We made a trip to First Watch on the way to the airport to take our daughter so she could catch a flight to Texas.  I know what you are thinking...""why would anyone want to go to Texas on purpose?"".  She really does have a good reason, so off we went.  We walked in and they seated us right away.  Our waitress promptly greeted us and took our drink order.  She introduced herself as ""Lindsay"", and I am sure she is not the ""Milkoholic Lindsay"" from the E-Trade commercial.  She did a great job for us.  Our food came out quickly and it was quite tasty.  Lindsay checked on us quite a few times as we ate and refreshed our drinks.   We will be returning for another visit.     The valley needs more places that have a good to great breakfast...!"							
36JW4WBR06002485Z6S1BAB6KUYFHK	We made reservations for 7:30 and arrived about 45 mins before our reservation so we thought that we might get lucky and get a table early. We ended up not getting seated until 7:50 which we were not happy about because we had show tickets. We were so happy with the quality of the food and service provided that the issue with the long wait was no longer an issue. We will definitely be returning to the restaurant							
31S7M7DAGG6C759WLBCOK6JESKFLT5	"We made reservations for Maggiano's through Yelp...and it was so fast and easy!  I would highly recommend making reservations through Yelp, if it has the option.  I believe it was linked to Foursquare?? Not sure though.    We took my mom out for a late Mother's Day dinner.  It wasn't crowded; which was great...though it got a bit crowded after 6pm.  While, we waited for my mom to arrive we sat at the bar.  My husband got a beer and he got a little surprise!  The glass in which the bartender poured the beer had a lipstick mark.  It was gross.  He told the bartender and looked at it in shock.  He gladly switched it out.    We went with the family style ""classic"" option which includes 2 appetizers, salads and desserts & 4 entrees.  We got the calamari and zucchini for appetizer.  The ceasar and spinach salad.  The chicken parm, grilled salmon, spaghetti w/ meatballs and gnocchi w/ italian sausage.  Spumoni ice cream and tiramisu for dessert.  My favorite was the calamari, cesar salad, chicken parm and desserts...everything else is okay.  I didn't care to much for the salmon, though.  The portions were huge; had to take a lot of it home.  I didn't understand how they just put the ice cream in a warm bowl...by the time we got it, it was melted.  Maybe they should put it in an ice bowl??  The waiter was nice and service was quick.  View is nice...oversees the Wynn properties.  There is also a man that walks around in his violin to play music for you; which I believe you have to tip him.   It's a good place to eat if there is a big group of you and craving Italian food."							
3P6ENY9P79CKCVAV0EYME7OY0MQHID	"We met up with a group of friends at Maggiano's on a Friday evening for one of their birthdays. Due to the size of our party, we ordered family style. This works out better for appetites such as mine, as I can usually help devour whatever is left over.  We went with the larger set-up of family style meals, which looked to be a good deal. As we awaited our appetizers and salads, an older gentleman stopped by the table with his acoustic guitar to sing some songs, he played three (including happy birthday) and wished our friend another happy birthday before he went to another table. And proceeded to play the same three songs (but with more gusto for them); and to the next table, you guessed it... same three songs.   The appetizers came out, we opted for the fried mozzarella and zucchini. The mozz was great! Wish there was a little more sauce on the plates or some ranch. The fried zucchini came with what looked like ranch, so it all worked out. Nope, that is a lemon sauce that masquerades as ranch. When asked for a side of ranch, we were rebuffed with a, ""We don't carry ranch here."" OK then.  Our main courses began to roll out, this time our table became filled with lasagna, ravioli, alfredo and a go-to Italian dish: chicken parmagiana.  Where to begin? The lasagna had a very pre-made/frozen taste to it, however, Stouffer's tastes more authentic than Maggiano's. Their iteration of chicken parm was ghastly. It seemed like it was cooked in a microwave with its rubbery, tough, dry and flavorless texture.  I did not partake in the ravioli or alfredo until the next day, which is where I messed up. Those two dishes were the best of the four we chose.  Desserts came out and they looked amazing. I, however, don't eat dessert, so I can only go off of the very little that was left to ascertain that it was pretty good.  Onto day 2... I awoke Saturday morning with some serious pain. A mixture of ""I ate too much and now I am starving"" and ""RUN"". After a few trips to eliminate the intestinal pain, I was feeling good again.  That evening, my wife re-heated the leftovers we were given according to the instructions on the to-go containers. Once more into the breach we went, devouring what was left. The ravioli and alfredo I skipped the night before were really tasty and I wished I had tried them the first night.  Sunday morning was a repeat of Saturday morning. Needless to say, I shan't be patronizing Maggiano's again. The service was pretty good, the ambiance was nice. As is usually an issue for restaurants, it was the food that will keep me from going back."							
3MIVREZQVHEOVJZMJ76S01VCJDAKQM	We ordered 4 items from the tapas menu and all I can say is why was everything luke warm?  Tried the seared calamari based on other reviews and it had no flavor despite all the dark sauce on the plate.							
31ODACBENUVMJ2CUOGFURNMM07NSQB	We ordered a few items on the tapas menu. Food is okay although some of the items reminded me of Julian Serrano's menu. The execution was decent but the food didn't taste very good. One thing though: I noticed the other reviews mentioned how small the portions were; yet all of the items we ordered came in huge portions!   You're probably better off going elsewhere for tapas.							
3AJA9FLWSCE0YZJP5OAMBMCLK7CFIC	We ordered the Jack Daniel's burger along with the combo fries.  The burger was good but the Jack Daniel's flavoring was a little too sweet and thankfully they put it in a separate container.  I'm not a seet potatoe fries kinda guy but they were ok as well.  The service was good and the refills on our soft drinks were constant.  They even offered to make us a drink to go if we wanted to which is kinda cool.							
3QGHA0EA0JGSMDREP3S5TNU8KKJBWY	we recently went here for lunch.The food was awesome and delicious.Our waiter was courteous and extremely efficient. Portions and drinks were huge.Highly recommend.							
37AQKJ12TX40QIH1UKEF6XTVMX0TTF	"We sat outside. View was very nice.   Food portions are HUGE. A half order is enough for one person. A full order is for people who want to share.   I ordered a special, Chianti Beef, it was a little salty for my taste but my brother said it was great. I tasted some of his Garlic Shrimp Linguine, which was good but the noodles lacked flavor. I also tasted some of my mom's Shrimp Angel Hair Pasta which was the best in my opinion. It was full of flavor, but not too much. My family did critcize that the noodles were a little overcooked though, but I found it perfect. i guess it depends on your preference and how you like your noodles. Now i saved the best for last, I would honestly go to Maggiano's just for their garlic mashed potatoes.   I have ever only really tasted two chef's mashed potatoes that i liked previous to this dish, but this is definitely in my top 2. It's hard to describe, but you just have to taste it. It's the perfect blend of ingredients, not too salty, good consistency, just try it! I'd seriously go all the way to San Jose from SF just to eat the mashed potatoes.   Food took a little long to be prepared. Service was pretty good. Our waters got refilled, but nothing extremely special or eyecatching."							
3Y40HMYLL1YM7C5AZZ5M0W03I7VXUT	"We stopped here at the last minute. Managed to get a table quickly on a busy night. Best to get a reservation if you want to go. Pricing is better than most. The food was wonderful. Everything we ordered, including the dessert, was at least a 4/5 rating. The service was excellent. Friendly and just the right amount of attention without hovering. The view of the strip and the Wynn is a nice taste of Las Vegas. The roving musicians I can take or leave. It's a bit coercive when you are asked if you want a song for your lady in front of her, and knowing that they expect payment."							
3PZDSVZ3J5XIEKXRINRVPQBBHGY4NU	"We took the kids to Vegas for Spring Break last week.  Yeah, I know.  Why the hell would anyone want to go to Vegas with minors?  Ask my wife.  Anyway, we needed to find a place with food that was better than McDonald's for the adults and would appeal to our kids and not bankrupt us.  I had the nifty Yelp app on my new, handy dandy Crackberry and it pointed us to Maggiano's.  The app provided many positive Yelp reviews ( of dubious value as usual), a web address and phone number enabling me to call and make a reservation and a map feature that helped us find the place with ease.  We were seated promptly upon arrival and the waiter was very kind to my wife and I in spite of the antics of my three little darlings.  It can be a royal pain to take care of families at a nice restaurant with tablecloths and wine glasses but the service was very good.  The have a full kids menu from which our children were able to choose something they liked.  My wife had some chicken pesto pasta dish which was tasty and I ordered chicken francesca, which was supposedly inspired by the Italian cuisine from St, Louis.  Having become intimately familiar with St. Louis Italian cuisine over the years I think that was a reach but nonetheless my dinner was very good-especially for a chain.  The price was very reasonable and I would love to dine here again but I'm not planning to go to Vegas again in the near future and unfortunately the closest franchise is in Orange County.  Perhaps they'll open a San Diego location some day."							
3NSCTNUR2Z3TQK72NO508CXPI5TA5K	"we used to go here every Sunday...but, something happened a few months ago and all of a sudden the wait staff turned over and the service just went to crap.  The Manager did buy us breakfast once and encouraged us to return...AND WE DID..then the stupidity just multiplied like bunnies and rats.  Food is good but the staff just does not seem to give a darn about you getting your drinks or food....  Don't waste your time Phoenix Downtowners.....go to Good Egg"							
3CO05SML7VLMUU7ISTLAM7Q8116R0O	"We visit Las Vegas between 2-5 times a year and have never dined at Maggiano's.    Great place to relax, have a delicious bite and not spend a whole bunch of money.  I had the Chicken Romano and my boyfriend had the spaghetti and meatball.  I wanted to trade dishes with him.  That is the way I enjoy my spaghetti!!  Perfect!!!  Vanessa was our server and she was efficient and friendly.  Only downfall about the visit was the parking lot.  It was full and confusing.  Better if you walk there.  We will visit Maggiano's again, for sure!!"							
3ZZAYRN1I67KDQCTY3SGCNN8NPKOTP	"We went at around 6pm on a weeknight.  There was a 15-20 minute wait for a table for 4 but there was no wait for the tables at the bar so we opted for this.  Service was excellent.  The portions were very large for the price -- the full size pastas came in 8""-9"" casserole dishes and about 3"" deep.  Everyone at the table was satisfied with their dishes (fettuccine alfredo, baked ziti and sausage, some type of seafood pasta -- it was on the Little Italy Favorites menu).  I ordered the eggplant parmesan which I wasn't too fond of.  I found it to be too breaded and mushy, not what I'm used to.  Otherwise, great atmosphere, great prices.  There was even a wedding party at the table next to ours!"							
3W3RSPVVGS7R7IOLLG2YP25GBYMLUW	We went for Dinner and I made reservations on OpenTable which is super easy. We arrived and were seated within a couple minutes. The waiter came to the table and we told him that my wife has a gluten allergy and he said that would not be a problem and took our drink order and said he would be back to get our food order. When he came back he had the Chef who ask my wife what she wanted and said he could make pretty much anything she wanted and she decided on the Chicken Parmesan which she loved. My 11 year old got the Mama's Lasagna & my 13 year old got the Fettuccine Alfredo and they both thought it was epic. I enjoyed my Veal Parmesan and instead of the Spaghetti I asked for the Fettuccine Alfredo and they said no problem. I have to say the food was good but the service was Great. My wife got the Creme Brle for Desert which she always enjoys. It has become a must visit when we go to Vegas.							
3R6RZGK0XFSBKWKK9L1TFW9VYKYYVP	"We went here because we got a gift card for Xmas, I thought it was delish we stared off with the calamari was a little under seasoned but not fishy, the complementary bread was great and then we had a chicken flatbread that was good the waitress was the nicest ever. We had a fifty dollar gift card and ended up using $38 on dinner and two drinks and gave the rest to her for being super nice. Would go again even without a gift card."							
375VSR8FVWPJWFD8WNY2S6TUJ8QZRP	"We went here for a business lunch. The atmosphere was really nice and bright and felt very appropriate for a power lunch. Prices were pretty reasonable.   *Hot bread - highlight of the meal!  *Chopped salad - the ""crispy pancetta"" was bacon bits, ick, otherwise not a bad salad *For my entree I got the roasted chicken with ""crispy potatoes and green beans"". Everything on the plate was soggy, tasteless and gross. I realize one shouldn't order roasted chicken at an Italian place, hence why this place gets 3 stars instead of 2!!  Overall not a bad place to dine on the strip but with so many fabulous options in Vegas it's hard for me to endorse this place. Boring and corporate come to mind. For Italian I prefer Nora's."							
37VE3DA4YUXAPNWPU465SKKL5W6HB4	"We went here for breakfast last weekend and I was pleasantly surprised. The coffee is there own brand and it has a great flavor. I especially like that they have a bunch of different flavored creamers.  The staff is very friendly and efficient. You can tell this is the type of place that has regulars. I also like that they have both breakfast and lunch items to choose from.  I had the Key West Crepe egg. The crepe egg is a mixture between a thin crepe and whipped eggs and it was stuffed with turkey, bacon, avocado, tomatoes and probably some other goodies. It came with hash browns and an english muffin. My husband had the traditional breakfast which is pretty much what it sounds like. Overall I would recommend First Watch because it's a great breakfast at a good price with friendly staff."							
3UDTAB6HH6FGQUBWYCLOVMQEVF190K	"We went here last Thursday around 7pm and goooooood loooooord was it a long wait for a table.  I was surprised this place was as packed as it was.  Definitely make a reservation..even on a Thursday!  Aside from that the food was decent.  The wife went for the lasagna after rave reviews from my 78 year old coworker who said it was the best he'd ever had.  It was ok.  A little too sausagey and I thought lasagna was supposed to have lasagna noodles in it???  I went with the calamari marinara/arrabiata or whatever which was pretty good...but Nora's is better and $5 less.    Portions are huge here, its nice they offer half sizes but I would still opt for the ""regular"" portions since leftovers (ie 2nd meal) is worth having.    You could easily just split a salad and entree with another person and be full.    I still prefer Nora's and Battista's over this place but its not bad.  I give it 3.5"							
337F8MIIMZTFTO5KHHPXEEFY9NN40J	"We went here on 10/9/2012 and let me say please go to a different location. I had to send back two, yes two breakfast back! The first was cold and loaded with cheese granted I asked for extra chives and bacon but when I asked what happened, I was told that the restaurant was out of chives. I could located the extra bacon to save my life and never requested for extra cheese. I then requested for the sirloin tips and eggs and got back a burnt up mess but at least the mgr on duty was able to identify what is was. Let's also get to the Spanish speaking in the back about a table bitching about the breakfast. News flash...I speak,read and write in Spanish. Thank you very much. Very unprofessional and the cook(s) and servers should take a look and the pictures of how meals should look before sending it out. If it looks like crap...your customers will assume it taste like crap too! I'm so glad I took pictures of the meals and sent them along w my experience to the IHOP manager so we can get some additional training."							
3SD15I2WD2APP38VJS0VDAXJ8QD631	"We went here the past Tuesday for lunch and I got what I normally order since I am not a fan of pasta, the salmon entree with spinach and potatoes.  The last time I had this was probably last year.  When my food arrived, I was surprised to find that my potatoes were on a small plate while the nicely cooked salmon, placed on top of bed of spinach topped with capers and lemon and herb butter, was on another.  The salmon was as good as I remembered, but the potatoes weren't the same.  Better!  They used to come on the same plate as the salmon and was plain roasted, nothing unique.  But now, they are nice and crisp and WOW, it adds a different texture as an accompaniment to my fish and I am loving this entree more than ever before!  I usually only finish half of this entree but this time around, I finished the entire meal and yes, I was happily full.  Additionally, our waitress provided our party with exceptional service.  Her service is comparable to that of a waitress at Joel Robuchon (I know, bold statement, but she is that wonderful)."							
344M16OZKIV06MUK7T38YCN2U5SENA	"We went this past Saturday with my sister-in-law and her husband.  She works in the area and suggested we go to dinner here.   I was extremely pleased with our meal.  We started with Egg Rolls, Pot Stickers and Boiled Won Tons.  The egg rolls were crispy and flavorful, the pot stickers were plump and the filling was delish, but the star for me was the boiled won tons.  I have never had anything like them, They were packed full of meat and served in this savory peanut flavored broth. My sister-in-law was a little wary of trying one, but she did and concurred that they were quite good.  She is not the most adventurous eater so that is really saying something!  For our main courses we  shared Mongolian Beef, Peking Shrimp, Salt and Pepper Shrimp, and Sichuan Beef.  The Mongolian Beef was tender and seasoned perfectly, The Peking Shrimp had a spicy red sauce the had a little tang to is and was served with snow peas (nice and crunchy not over cooked) and onions.  The salt and pepper shrimp were fried with a nice light batter that was salty but not over done and the jalapeno peppers were just right.  The Sichuan  Beef was my least favorite, I thought the sauce made the batter a little soggy but I really liked that sauce so was still a good dish.  The portions are huge, I was full after the appetizers as were my dinner companions, so we took a lot of our dinner home, and it tasted great the next day.  Our waitress was very sweet and attentive.  I especially appreciated that she boxed up our leftovers instead of just dropping off some boxes at the table.  From the outside the restaurant doesn't really look like much, a sand colored stucco building, but inside it is furnished and decorated nicely, the tables are spaced  so that you don't feel crowded and the lighting was bright but not overly so.  My only complaint would be that their tofu dishes had meat in them so there weren't as many vegetarian options as I would have like to have seen.  I didn't get a chance to ask if they can adjust them for vegetarians, but will the next time I go and before I take any of my veggie buddies there."							
3TZ0XG8CBU0Y8JGZTGY3O1WWEDD987	"We were about to eat at Oyster Bar, but there wasn't a table to seat 8 people, so we went to TGI Friday's.  Wow, the food was actually pretty good.  Food from the kids' menu is just as big as the normal entrees.  If you have kids, order the ribs for $7, and you'll get more than a half-rack of ribs for half the price.    I ordered ribs and lobster.  The ribs were slightly overcooked.  I completely forgot that I was supposed to dip the lobster in the melted butter until we left.  I also tried the lobster carbonara pasta, which was the best out of all dishes.  The grilled shrimps from other entrees were nicely seasoned and grilled.  Overall, I enjoyed dinner."							
3PGQRAZX020VS43GFQWO49POZG4SYE	"We were excited to hear of a new tapas restaurant in the neighborhood.  We stopped in excited to try this place before heading to a show, only to walk in and discover it felt like nothing more than a PT's kind of vibe.  We sat down at the bar to order a drink and dine, the bartender had a bit of an attitude letting us know she was very busy (but the place didn't seem that bad!), we finally ordered one drink, but the bartender took so long to come back that we were so turned off by the place, we never even ordered food...."							
33KGGVH24UX6YFECXBV2PUV67AY1XY	"We were in Vegas for a week.  We happened to walk by Maggiano's and my husband decided he wanted to try this.  We did show up on a VERY busy Friday night without a reservation and we were ok with that.  They only had space at the bar, we were ok with that.    We placed our order and I had asked for lemon with my water.  As she was busy, I waited and waited and waited.  Finally asked the bus boy for some lemon and he brought it almost immediately.  She ""happened"" to walk by, saw the lemon and said ""Oh, you got your lemon?""  I told her that the bus boy had brought, her response ""Yeah, I asked him to, just checking that he brought it.""  WTF?  She lied!!!!!  From when we sat down to when we were served our appetizers, an hour had gone by.  When we asked the waitress about our appetizers, she became a  little aggressive and said she was doing the best she could.  When we finally got our appetizers, we asked her to bring the main course as soon as possible, didn't know how long we would have to wait.   Food not bad but certainly not impressed with the waitress."							
3U74KRR67M12V5CHXOS3XYN3XFENT8	"We were struggling with trying to have a good reasonably priced dinner for 22 in las Vegas. Everyplace we called wanted us to rent a private room, order from a pricey  catering menu and guarantee a minimum. Believe it or not, the totals were coming up to almost  FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS  including liquor,  tip tax and service charges.  We decided to have the dinner in our suite at Caesars and have maggiano's deliver. Best decision ever. Ashley guided us through the process and we had tons of great food at a fraction of the cost. They delivered on time, set everything up and left. We even had leftovers for lunch the next day. The food was actually better than I thought it would be. Bread, desert,  salad, entrees, everything was great. Would use this place again.  Total tab was under $500. We spent another hundred at the liquor store setting up our bar. Even if you add the cost of our 2 bedroom suite, we're still ahead. First time I won in Vegas.   Great night."							
3UZUVSO3P7BUO49KVSO8LXY2PFIMEI	We were there over an hour and a half just to eat lunch.  Waitress was so slow took 20-30 between each time we seen her.  People next to us called over a manager because it took 25 minutes to just get a to go box.  I think it was more of Colette attitude that caused most of the anxiety with everyone.  She just doesn't know how to multi task.  We had other servers and manager to fill up our drinks and even to get us a bill.  However the food is always amazing.  They just need to work on training :(							
3LN3BXKGC0BODUZP5PKJUYL50XBGWK	"We've always liked our normally pretty flawless dining experiences here.  But on this particular occasion, when of course I was introducing the restaurant to two friends, the wheels of service largely came off the tracks.  We had reserved a booth that overlooked picture windows facing Strip hotels across the street, but it wasn't ready when we arrived.  We had to wait about 20 minutes for a booth to be cleared, which was no big deal.  But it established a pattern of service being at least two beats behind all night.  For starters, I ordered Calamari Fritte and Crab & Shrimp Imperial, a special of the day.  I also ordered a cup of Tuscan Sausage & Orzo Soup and a side of Caesar Salad before my entree of Linguine & Clams.  Bread arrived first, which was good and crusty.  But our Iced Teas and soft drinks were not brought forth until 10 minutes after the presentation of bread, EVO, and butter.  And, one soft drink was missing.  So were two of four bread plates and a knife.    Soon afterward, the appetizers arrived.  Unfortunately, so did both my soup and salad.  Four items were plopped on the table at the same time--all of them mine.  Although jammed up with food, I did my best to race through the appetizers before my soup got cold, and largely succeeded by taking half of each appetizer home.  The Crab & Shrimp Imperial, consisting of Crab-stuffed Lobster with Herb Bread Crumbs and Lobster Cream Sauce over Orzo pasta, was simply excellent.  It was also very filling.  The deep-fried calamari was uncharacteristically undercooked, but still fairly tasty--especially dipped in the Lemon Aioli that was prepared on request.  The accompanying Marinara Sauce was also good and mellow.    As before, the Tuscan Sausage & Orzo Soup did not disappoint.  The fennel-flavored soup packed an unusual but welcome taste of mild sausage, fresh tomatoes, celery, and white beans.  The side of Caesar Salad was a generous helping of cool and crisp Romaine greens with Focaccia Croutons and grated Parmesan Cheese.  Linguine & Clams with invisible but tasty White Clam Sauce was a nice pasta dish that boasted both fresh and chopped clams.  But, unfortunately, only 7 fresh clams were present, which not only seemed meager but were far less than I had enjoyed on a previous occasion.  And, I bit down on a small piece of clam shell that was included in the mix.     Garlic Bread Focaccia was not very garlicky at all.  And, inexplicably, the cheesy Fontina Potatoes that my wife had ordered did not arrive at our table until 20 minutes beyond the third of three promises of ""2 minutes longer"" by our server, just AFTER our packaged leftovers had been handed to us.  Obviously, we didn't want additional starch any more at a point when we were about to leave the premises.  After an apology by our server that seemed sincere, the still steaming potatoes were packaged in a baking tin and presented to us again without charge.  The quality of ingredients and tastiness of what I ate were mostly sound as always.  And, kudos and an extra 1/2-star to restaurant management for calling to report that my missing Kindle had been found on the floor of our booth, before I raced back to retrieve it right after midnight.  So, 3-1/2 stars on an off night."							
3MGHRFQY2L5VRVJ46OD4U3J54OLY0X	"Wee Bite is a small, but comfortable restaurant. The environment is calm, and the staff is friendly. I had the Bacon Roll and the Hot Chocolate. The Bacon Roll was simple, but it was nice; a true gem for bacon-lovers. The Hot Chocolate was smooth and rich, but not too rich. An excellent value for the money."							
3AXFSPQOYQEWTA3VN6VMNNRLXM1FJO	"Well this is a review of my second visit to Toros! I purchased a groupon and thought based on my first review it would better being cheaper. We advised the waiter that we had the groupon and were told we couldn't use it for alcohol or specials! I don't drink so it was a big deal, but the specials thing seemed weird and it was explained simply as not being able to combine coupons. We ordered our drinks and waited for them to be brought back, so we could order dinner! After about ten minutes our waiter did not return. No drinks no waiter! I stopped the bus boy and asked for our waiter, who was serving other tables! The waiter came back to the table, no drinks asking what we needed? Our drinks and to place our order. The waiter then revised us we can't order any specials.  I thanked him and placed the same order as below! The waiter went away and didn't return with our drinks or our food for twenty minutes or so, going as far as avoiding our table. I asked for manager this time! To which I was told he is busy dealing with another guest. I looked and saw him being berated by another guest about the food he received!  We simply thanked the bus boy and instructed him to cancel our orders and that we would be leaving! Thanks to groupon, we got our moneyback from the groupon and will never return!   Let me start with I ate my whole meal as well as my parents! I ordered sareala w/ langostinos! They brought out my plate with lots of seafood but no langostinos to be found. When I asked the waiter, he returned to tell me the shrimp were the langostinos! I said no those are shrimp. The waiter then returned to the kitchen and apologized to me stating they had substituted the jumbo shrimp in without telling me. I said I wish I was told ahead of ordering. Then I was approached by the manager who presented me with the same lie about the jumbo prawns being langostinos! I corrected him w a simple google search and he apologized! Then after waiting fifteen minutes for the owner to visit our table as asked by the manager, we were presented a bill and no visit from the owner. We asked the waiter to remove the meal that was misrepresented to us. Finally the owner came over to the table, who immediately was argumentative and even a little threatening to my father! He started the conversation with""you ate the shrimp did you not? "" I simply said my complaint wasn't that it was good or inedible, but that I was promised and lied to twice about the langostinos. The owner countered his original shrimp statement and said that I got the other kind of langostinos without claws. So now I'm lied to three times. When we simlly asked if that was his stance, he snatched the bill and removed the meal. At no point did the owner even try to solve or listen to what our actual complaint was. To top everything off with this, the owner followed my father out in a manner that was very aggressive! This is not a place to eat and very overpriced for what you get!"							
3BCRDCM0ODAVL1G24YSUUWELJCZK6Q	"Well, we come here a couple of times a year when we are in Vegas. Tonight we had an excellent server, Frank. He's a tall ""New Yawk"" boy.  We had several requests throughout the meal, which were all attended to promptly, and with a genuine smile. We really enjoyed the excellent service and sunny disposition."							
3H781YYV6TYY1ZZ44PPK7BTUJNEETB	"Well... The food may have been a little closer to the mediocre side, but the service was great! I had what my gf always says as a ""boring breakfast"". Chocolate chip pancakes, and a side of ham and an egg. The pancake was a little dry but the ham was pretty good. Coffee was average, eggs were average. But they did have some decent things on the menu. I do like that they brought out an entire carafe of coffee, and water so I don't get stuck paying 2 bucks for a tiny cup-o-joe w/ no refill, or trying to flag someone down for one. Nice! But our server was great. She apologized for the OJ spilled all down the side of her previous to our visit. It did look bad though. lol. When I went to pay they were the guy asked me how everything was and what I had planned today. I sincerely appreciate people who enjoy their job, and make your experience enjoyable.   In short: Service, 5 stars.... Food 3 stars..."							
368IUKXGA5OWWSDIHQX2QD0KDM56PD	"Went back again. Sat at the bar with a friend from Long Island, NY. We had a sensational dinner. Not good, but great. It's basic Italian food. Wine is reasonably priced. Same wine across the street at the Wynn is literally double per bottle."							
38F60IALAGXZA9KAWIQ5MMRQPM3T03	"Went for my third time its good, but my food was not as hot and it had of a funny taste."							
34R3P23QHSH2DQU0PV21FYX6FXNWHY	"Went here after shopping in the Fashion Show Mall as me and my friend both wanted Italian and I had come here before and knew that the food is pretty good. Last time I came here I had a Caesar salad which was good and is my favorite, but I decided to try the Maggiano's Salad this time. It was good, but it ended up being pretty filling, so I was almost too full to eat my spaghetti and meatballs, but luckily I took it home for later. I don't have anything negative to say about the food, and the wait time was 20 minutes which is average for dinner time in Vegas. Our server was decent...he could have refilled my water/soda more and he had to double check what we ordered even after asking us twice when he originally took our order. We sat by the window which was great for a view of the strip. I don't ever go out of my way to go to Maggiano's but the food is good and so is the staff."							
3R868ACW4SSS7P4UGC4QT2FNHZEZGS	Went here and it is nice to be able to park and go up the elevator right into the restaurant.   Food was extremely good and the service was excellent.  The prices were very affordable as well.  Will definitely go back soon.							
3LCXHSGDLTMXMZMPFPKUX6X8H40ESM	"Went here for a lunch date....both impressed. I had the orange chicken, J-Luv had the lemon chicken. I liked his better though....and luckily he learned well in kinder that sharing is caring! Keeper, right? Loved it! Big lunch sizes, and they come with egg rolls and soup. Going back and it is in my neighborhood! :)"							
39I4RL8QGJXQ4OBGFPWIK6EFV4P4HL	"Went here for a quick dinner before a concert at the Cosmo. Made reservations so we wouldn't have to wait. Seated immediately upon arrival, and by the window at that!  Great service. April was our server and she was awesome and on top of everything.   Will definitely eat here again when I am in Vegas next."							
38G0E1M85MLU3N0FZK44CB3I2WNVUO	"Went here for dinner - just me and the hubby.  Every time we come out to Vegas we come here.  Great place, love the food, scenery was very nice and italian of course.  Waiters was great.  Very little wait time.  If you never been there before and don't know where to park it can be tricky or you will be walking for a while before you get there. Hubby and I had a great romantic time.  Been going there since 2003, every visit to vegas we always make sure we stop here. This is great mouth watering italian food.  My fav dish is the Rigatoni 'D' & We love the calamari!!"							
3NSCTNUR2Z3TQK72NO508CXPI5UA5L	"Went here for dinner over the weekend and man my experience here was really good!  The place was really kept nice, real clean and the staff was incredible.  I had the New York Steak 16oz.  which was amazing, our waiter Taylor did a real good job waiting on us and always kept coming back to see if we needed water or anything else.  Overall I would recommend this place if your in town and want to dine on some good italian food."							
324N5FAHSXRG0RV356026OUK05PVKR	"Went here last night. Mondays are the night to go - 1/2 off tapas. It was busy, but probably because it was on a Monday.  Also, I liked that there is no smoking.   They had a pretty good selection of tapas. We probably tried about half of them.  Here is the list:  Pil Pil Shrimp - came out sizzling hot in a cast oven pan. The shrimp were good sized, I think there were five or six shrimp in butter, garlic and other seasonings.   Calamari - Tried both the fried and the grilled. I liked the grilled calamari better than the fried. Decent portion size, not huge but it is tapas. The calamari was still tender and the grilled had a great flavor and was served on squid ink.  The fried, still good, a light batter. There was one sauce missing, it is supposed to come with marinara and two aioli's but it only had one aoili.    Striped seabass - This could easily by a small meal, one piece of fish.  It was still tender. I liked the onion and peppers it was served with. The fish in itself did not have much flavor.   Stuffed piquito peppers - There were two in the order. I could have ate a whole plate. Grilled peppers stuffed with gooey cheese - need I say more.   Fried Manchego - I love cheese curds, and this was like the spanish rendition. The manchego was a little salty, but Manchego is.  There are three wedges provided - it was tasty but a bit greesy I may skip this in the future.   Pan Bohli - Two pieces of breach with serrano ham and cheese on it.  Good, a little greasy as they grilled the bread - but nothing really noteworthy so I probably would skip this again.   I can't remember the name but sausage on potato - the waitress recommended this. It was good but I would probably not get this again. There were four servings/pieces - the sausages were about an inch long and although they had good flavor they were a little tough. They were sitting an a small mound of mashed potatos.   The normal tapas price ranged from $6-$9 approximately. For the size of the items I think the price is a little high for the amount you get, but for 1/2 days it is a steal. We also got a pitcher of red sangria ($26) - it was okay, but not very sweet and had a more prominent wine taste than you normally get in most sangria's. I prefer it to be a bit sweeter.   I was also impressed that they had Estrella beer on draft (the only place I have seen it) and $6 for a 16 oz poor which is good. Their wine list was also reasonably priced and although small they had some decent wines, not the normal Chateau St. Michelle etc you always see. I can't remember the list but I noted that they had Tobin James Cab.   The waitress was nice and the food came out quick. Also they have half off sangria on Thursdays and happy hour from 4-6pm and 11pm-2am with 20% off tapas, and drink discounts for beer, wine and well.  Overall I liked it here for the price, I would come back on Mondays or during happy hour."							
3P458N04Q1XDN0W8GFVGUD5BZGCX2B	"Went here today (22nd Aug) whilst in Vegas, we haven't left Vegas yet and I felt I needed to write a review.  Everything from start to finish was horrible. I ordered the chicken Parmesan. The chicken was tough, over cooked and tasteless. It came with a side of spaghetti marinara. The spaghetti was over cooked, mushy and the whole thing was very plain. Needless to say I didn't even eat half of my meal.  My friend ordered some sort of pasta and seafood dish (I cannot remember the name) and despite that naturally having slightly more flavour due to it being seafood, the pasta was mushy also and tasteless.   I asked for bottled water, they brought me tap water which I thought ok cool nevermind... I don't know what they did to the tap water there but (maybe it was the ice cubes they used?) but there was a hideous aftertaste of antiseptic!   Our server never checked on us once, because if so I would have told her I disliked my meal and also ordered another drink. We had to ask her for the cheque three times and after we finished eating our meal and were given our cheque, it was 25 minutes before our plates were cleared.  Needless to say I will not be returning."							
3V0TR1NRVAIBU1329JMQ3KRBI9ZA4G	"Went here with my fiances family  and this place was amazing. They are Sicilian, so you can only imagine how important real Italian food is to them. We had a party of 12, and they treated us so nicely . Anyway, the bathroom, has the BEST napkins I have ever dried my hands with! I know weird right, and apparently the men's has some pretty cool artwork above the urinals ( according to my fiance' ).  The food is amazing, hot, yummy. Some of the family  had the raviolis, lasagna, sausage appetizer, salads, the shrimp linguine; all was superb. Will be going again when in Vegas. Like prior comments it is a chain restaurant but run like an original! Thanks again for the lovely time!"							
3U18MJKL1U2L9OA6B2XD8ONZ9TENCP	"Went in for lunch the other day and had the Mongolian Beef, House Chow Mein and Boiled Won Ton. All of them were very good and the service was ridiculously quick with refills, etc. Would like to go back and try some of the other dishes."							
3FBEFUUYRKLP9O7GS7F50IBPE04A60	"Went not expecting much as I have been to Arby's numerous times.  I went through the drive thru this time where I was greeted kindly, but the service was pretty slow.  The food was exactly what I expected, and my appetite was satisfied.  Recommend if you're looking for something other than your typical burger and fries."							
30IRMPJWDZZO7KEMWMVS5R5HFZDRKV	"Went on dinner date on 4/14, made reservations greeter didnt even acknowledge that we arrived. Hostess saw that we were uncomfortable as she sat the table. Too many tables and one restaurant.I thought to myself if were with our other table next to us.anyways. .. Our server Stephanie was great very knowledgeable on the menu offered appetizers(Bruschetta)appetizer was out b4 bar drinks! asked for chilled martini's .actually came out chilled! Food  was delicious!!! (chicken piccata and chicken parmesan).stefanie offered us tiramisu as dessert was delightful! Thank u Stefanie for great service!"							
366FYU4PTG5ZYG9HAGBS6K6Y0ANKEB	"Went to Maggiano's on Sunday night for surprise engagement dinner. We were a group of 11 and only had to wait around 20 minutes. We were able to share a bottle of prosecco at the bar during the wait. We were told our table was ready and they led us into the wine cellar. I was so excited to be in a private room with dimmed lighting.  From dinner we ordered the Classic family style and were given the choices of two appetizers, salads, pastas, entrees and desserts. The food doesn't stop. The only hard part was agreeing on what to order.   Appetizers: Calamari Fritt and Bruschetta.  Salads: Ceasar and Chopped. Pastas: Mom's Lasagna and Chicken & Truffle Tortellacci  Entrees: Chicken Saltimbocca and Eggplant Parmesan Desserts: Creme Brulee and Chocolate Zuccotto Cake   My favorites were the Chopped Salad, love blue cheese! Chicken & Truffle Tortellacci was the most interesting flavors and the Eggplant Parmesan had the perfect breaded textured and eggplant was cooked just right. Creme Brulee was fantastic and huge, but by that point we were so full. I would also recommend the Chianti Castello di Querceto. Went really well with the Mom's Lasagna.  Ryan was our server and he was fantastic. Very attentive and helpful. They even brought in two older men who played guitar and violin and had us do our first dance. The night was great. Thank you Maggiano's and Ryan!"							
3SV8KD29L48X9B0D63P5RU7GOGVKZG	"Went to this place for breakfast for the first time the other day.  I was rather impressed that it was a healthy alternative to your average breakfast at Denny's or International House of Pancakes.  One of the first things I noticed when I walked in was that every table had their own pitcher of ice water ready for the customers to pour.  Don't get me wrong, while this was great since I was able to easily quench my thirst, I thought it was odd that for a state that's extremely conscious about water preservation, they could do this.  Fortunately I used some of the water our table couldn't finish by filling my empty water bottle.  ;b  Oh yeah, forgot to mention one really cool thing I like about this place is that when you get the check, it has the person's order and drinks AND tax summed up as Person 1, Person 2 , etc.  Plus a big lump sum at the bottom.  They really need to do that at ALL restaurants!!!  :D  Overall, the service was pleasant and prompt.  Unfortunately, I forgot the name of the tomato basil wrap dish I ordered, and while it was healthy delicious (tomato basil wrap, egg white, cheese, spinach, and smoked turkey... and side fruit), I was disappointed that the basil taste wasn't as strong as I hoped it would be.  My boyfriend also wasn't satisfied with his Chorizo Burrito.  So... 3 stars."							
3566S7OX5DZCJ08LFYR4VVII5HJ173	"Went to Toros for a dinner on a Friday night.  Service was good, but could have been better.  I had to flag our waiter down for utensils which weren't on the table but no big deal.  In other Tapas restaurants I'm used to the waiter coming over pretty frequently to check if you want anything else since they are small plates.   We ordered an array of tapas including the padron peppers, pil pil shrimp, and ox tail.  We also ordered the pork sandwich.  The peppers were tasty but I probably wouldn't order again.  The pil pil shrimp was excellent...lots of flavor and cooked very well.  I would skip the ox tail next time although it was done well.  The sandwich was terrible...dry with no sauce on it.  We ended up dipping it in the pil pil shrimp sauce which wasn't bad, but definitely do not order this.  We will probably be back to check this place out again, but it won't be a regular dining experience for us even though it's close to home"							
37VE3DA4YUXAPNWPU465SKKL5W6BHY	"Went to Toros this weekend with a group of friends.  We couldn't wait until this new  Tapas Summerlin Restaurant opened.  From the moment we walked in we were pleased.  The atmosphere was very cool; loved all the reclaimed wood on the walls.  The bar in the center has a really fun & friendly vibe.   Something different for the area!  The hostess was sweet,  told us immediately that they were very busy and it might be a bit.  But it was great!  Our waiter was very nice, explained the menu for us and helped us out with some favorites.  We were all very pleased!  Loved all the specialty drinks, The white wine sangria was so Awesome!  The staff seemed to all be so excited which made our dinner experience all the more fun....I am reading some of the reviews that people have written and I think that these people forget that this restaurant has been open for less than 2 weeks and it takes time to work out all the kinks.  With that being said, and with patience and understanding, this restaurant has unbelievable food, must try the Albondigas (meatballs) and the Pollo Parrilla (half Chicken) and lastly the Flan is perfection!  I love John Cutter's and wish the owner and his staff great success.  We all can't wait to go back soon!"							
3IZPORCT1FPX5UDEQ1SVSZPPNI9RHR	"Went with a  party of 10, went family style and two hours later still no entree.  Manager  understood the frustration, and said server was new.   Manager comped the bill, but didn't eat the food after two hours.  Waste of my time, and the restaurants supposed service.  Disappointing in both expectation and execution."							
3SBX2M1TKD33HHAJYFJCTK6GMRL4QH	"What a great menu, excellent service too. Would recommend the family style for any group over 6... We were able to try a little bit of everything. Everything from the chicken to pasta to seafood was great! I am used to NY Italian, and this place was very good in comparison."							
32ZCLEW0BZ08KNSP19RRZH5PZSPJPW	"What a great place to eat, food was great. I had the eggs benedict and had a special request to add spinach to it. They said no problem.  Was very good.  Portions just right. Very good."							
3XJOUITW8U7NY2P9DGKK1SI82Q1QTY	"What a great spot in Vegas.  It may be a chain, but its run like its an original. Great service and decor.  Food was pretty good as well.  The gf and I got bruschetta and stuffed mushrooms for apps.  Both were great!  For dinner the gf went with chicken marsala and I with the francaise.  Both came with sides.   I opted for the fried potatoes and she for the linguine with garlic and oil.  I threw in a side of broccolini to have a nice lil veggie in the mix.  Well 1 - 10: apps 10 marsala 7 - salty but good. francaise 5 - It wasn't bad, but I have had much better and expected more. ling with g&o - 2  No taste at all Potatoes - 7 Broccolini - 10 nicely cooked and seasoned in garlic and oil  The menu is very extensive and overall it was a great time with the gf.  I am looking forward to checking out the Maggiano's in north Jersey."							
31D0ZWOD0AFUVDL1QIZORH1Y1XJA00	"What a let down Maggiano's ended up to be. My first experience ended up being a horrible one.   Come on now, you do not vacuum your carpet when you have guests who are eating!! Making us move to another table just so you can vacuum does not make it any better! I think I might have ate some of the dust.   Besides that whole ordeal, the calamari was the best I ever had here. THE BEST! I ordered a chicken dish which was blah. KFC prepares better chicken. Its my fault though, ordering chicken at a Italian restaurant is like eating sushi at a buffet in Vegas, IT SUCKS!"							
3QGTX7BCHPIURSFAZGLZP5OYRQ0Z5A	"What a pathetic excuse for Italian food. In fact, what a terrible excuse for food in general. I ordered the ""Parmesan Crusted Tilapia"", which included mushy and obviously frozen fish and a bed of watery and bland spinach (3 leaves total) and orzo pasta. All off this was doused in an excess of capers and way too finely chopped cheap tomatoes.   However, taste and presentation aside, and once all scraped off, the fish had a terribly sour after taste. Upon bringing it up to the waiter, it was blamed on the capers (great endorsement of the kitchen & recipes). However after I left, my stomach was ill the entire night and into the next day. Sparing the intimate detail of my night spent with the toilet, the summary of this meal is that the fish was frozen and once defrosted it was obviously left out beyond expiration, and then cooked and presented with the effort of a 1st grader.   At this point I'd rather go vomit again than ever visit this establishment again. As an Italian and really as a human who eats food, I'm insulted at what this place is dishing out.   Spend an extra $5 a dish and go to D.O.C.G. in The Cosmopolitan instead for real Italian food."							
36JW4WBR06002485Z6S1BAB6KUXFHJ	"What can be said about TGI Friday's that hasn't already been said? Nothing. The correct answer is nothing. If you've been to one, you've been to all of them. No one is high-fiving about going there. No one is dropping to their knees in the rain crying ""NOOOOO!!"" with outstretched arms, either. The atmosphere is kitschy, the food is good but not great, the noise level is fairly high, the specials are decent.   If you've never been to a TGI Friday's before (and if you have, I don't know why you're reading this), don't expect amazing things. Expect a meal you'll neither regret nor remember three days later. They do average better than anyone."							
39AYGO6AFF0WT7151BKAMOVPD746NH	"What I like best about this location are the friendly people that work there. Very clean inside and out. Good location, good food served quickly with a smile. And they take gift cards :)"							
3ZVPAMTJWNJJ5YI36VAD7ZDO8IWGRH	What to say about this place. It is our fav spot for Italian food.   Awesome Service  Awesome Long Island Drinks  Awesome Food   I just hope they will not disappoint me ever because i just cant stop comparing others with them :)							
3ACRLU860NUY5D5N43YZ7HN8DGEEBL	"Whatever you do, do NOT overlook this little pizza joint in Verona. I can understand the urge to play it safe and order from a chain, but if you go to AJ's you won't regret it! We have called AJ's for delivery two times since we moved to Verona and both times, we had our pizza within 20 minutes. The thin crust is SO good and their pizza reminds me of the pies you can only find in New York or New Jersey.  Tonight, my husband and I went out on a limb and ordered the Mac and Cheese pizza and it was amazing! We ate the entire thing rather quickly. My only negative is that the crust was a little overdone on the bottom.. But just a couple spots were burned and it didn't matter, the pizza was still delicious. We will be back!"							
3FCO4VKOZ4TB312XRMMJ2F1CUQN7ES	"When 8 people can eat dinner with drinks for $50 a head on the Strip, you've got yourself a great deal.  Food is above average - not quite authentic but WAY above Olive Garden.  Service was great, and they were able to seat our party at 6:00 for 8 ppl without a reservation.  Be warned - you will be stuffed!!!"							
3538U0YQ1FAL8W16KL3Z7GAW1PGF3D	When I was visiting Las Vegas my sister said this place was good so we went to eat here for lunch and happy hour. I was impressed. The $4 margherita flat bread from the happy hour menu was more than a foot long and so delicious! The house bread was warm and soft. I ordered the eggplant parmigiana and it was so good. The eggplant was juicy and not dry and the spaghetti was perfectly cooked and the sauce was not too thick which I like. The staff was nice and friendly and very attentive.							
3D7VY91L65DWH1X0L1MIKPSHMI5BM7	"When I was younger I thought First Watch was a local restaurant that started at this location because they had several menu items with hospital ""themed"" names and with some of my family working at the hospital, it seemed like it must have been created just for them.  I was dashed to find out it wasn't true.  This is still my favorite First Watch location, and I thnk should be listed somewhere as ""Best place to choke on your ham"" or ""Best place to meet a single Dr.""  or something because it's littered with hospital staff.  Not that there's anything wrong with that...  I love everything on the menu.  I love how fresh everything tastes and how healty it (almost) all seems.  I didn't realize the limits of the menu until I went there for breakfast with someone who doens't eat eggs.  Wow. There goes 90% of the menu.  Not that a breakfast/lunch place has to have tons of non-egg options, but if someone is looking for an alternative, it's pretty much just pancakes, or order something from the lunch menu.    Service has always been good, though rushed at times.  Wonder if any of these folks are just working here to meet the Dr's of their mother's dreams?  Could be interesting to find out..."							
3QGHA0EA0JGSMDREP3S5TNU8KKIWBI	"When in Rome do as the Romans, when in fashion show mall eat at Maggianos.  the fired zucchini app is my wife's favorite item on the menu.  Portions are large and certainly shareable for lunch and dinner leftovers will be available the following day.  I like this place a lot..."							
38Z7YZ2SB3IXPO9YJ4LGNLGZR9LIQ9	"When it comes to Vegas restaurants, this would not have been my first choice. There is one near my house and I prefer to eat at places I have never been while I am on vacation, but it was my friends birthday dinner. We had a party of 11, so we had to order off the family style menu. We looked at the menu in advance so we already knew what we would be getting when we got there. We ordered the Fried Mozzarella and Stuffed Mushrooms to start. For entrees we ordered a Lobster Carbonara, Chicken Parmesan, Beef Medallions and a Bow Tie Pasta. We thought we would get one plate of each, but they brought 2 of each, one for each end of the table.  We where well fed. Dessert was my favorite. House made terramissu and Apple Cobbler. Wonderful!   Our server was wonderful too. She was very friendly and attentive. Our drinks never ran dry. It was a great experience. =)"							
3UQ1LLR26AO7S9ANFBL7P1TM4VTLAJ	"When we arrived at Vegas, it was late night. We just want to have something simply, not too oily or heavy, and then we found this Italian restaurant within 5 minutes walk from Trump. The environment is lovely. There is a violinist playing beautiful songs from table to table. The food were fabulous. We had crab cake for appetizer. The crab was fresh and delicious. I had sauteed shrimps with risotto and it was fantastic. The rice was creamy but not to soft. Shrimp was cooked just enough. My friend has salmon with pasta. It looked nice too."							
3Z3R5YC0P33Q7DZ0Z09QPTEUVOSFTT	Whenever I come to First Watch I feel like I'm going to a little diner.  The service is great and the food is great too.  They have a great selection of egg white omelets that you can choose from.    My favorite thing about First watch is that they leave you the whole pot of coffee at your table.  :)  The turkey sausage and egg white omelet is really good.    While if you are in the area and when some breakfast.  You should come here.  It is definitely better then Ihop or Denny's.							
3FVBZG9CLJU950TFWO9G83O2ES9H0I	"While food is good, the service experience is unacceptable. No hostess available and we were sat down by one of the servers. The server took 10 minutes to greet us at the beginning. Since we had time to analyze the menu, we were ready to order drinks as well as food.  We had: Calamari ( needed a few more seconds in the fryer), cantimpalitos ( excellent), tortilla (good), scargots ( probably canned, sauce was great). Bread service was good. Skip the sangria saince it was weak and watered down.  Back to service: not even one table check, we had to waive for service for several minutes while being ignored by several staff members. We ordered round two of tapas, no table bussing or drinks offered.  Without going into technical service issues, the staff need to be trained in genuine customer service. Smiling and general hospitality were completely absent from the place. Server was obviously "" in the weeds"" without a busser or assistant for the entire table turn.  Will I be back?  Maybe for an order to go...."							
3XU80RHWHZWWSCNL0ICZQH5BQZ344Z	"While in Vegas, my family and I decided to go on a last minute dinner outing and this was the place we chose. I'm so glad we did because DAYUM. The employees here were very helpful and quick to serve us,the prices weren't TOO bad and the food was the bomb dot com. They get really busy so if it seems like your waiter is running away from you, don't worry they're just trying to get through everybody lol. All in all I really enjoyed my experience here(:"							
33NOQL7T9OFDEAYCXES21PYPTG28ZM	"Why 4 stars? It's McDonalds, that's why. Its consistent but not great. But we were all raised on this stuff so its hard to hate it.   This particular McDonalds is clean and remodeled. Service is on the slower side and one time they totally drove me crazy by not accepting a McDonalds coupon that I got in a Pats Run swag bag.   I'm grateful to have it in the neighborhood."							
3087LXLJ6MWPR4291YLG5ICPYDWF0I	"Why oh why can't I get any consistency at restaurants!  One day it's excellent the next not so much!!! Why!!!  So I go back to this IHOP because today is 60 cent stack of pancake day (http://ihopllc.fbmta.com/members/ViewMailing.aspx?MailingID=30064797049)  I walk in and am immediately seated by a young lady who seemed like she was just there to do her job and would be so happy if it were the end of her shift. This was all subtle.   We are seated, and in less than what felt like maybe 2 minutes, little Ms. Jazmin came to get our drink order. As usual, I got water and my daughter decided to try their new Watermelon fizzy drink which she liked, btw.   When she brings our drinks back we order 2 stacks each of the promotional pancakes.   Meanwhile, a Hispanic couple comes in and is seated at the opposite end of the room from us. About 20 minutes later a couple of middle-aged women come in and our seated in the booth next to us.   My daughter comments that the Hispanic couple just received their order. Giving the situation the benefit of the doubt, I explain that maybe they put in their order before us.   Then a few minutes later, the two middle-aged women received their food. I jumped out of that seat and with aggravation and disdain, asked them where in the hell are me and my daughter's pancakes. I told them that we have been waiting 30 minutes for pancakes while these other people have their food and our already eating.   The waitress grabs a plate of pancakes and says to me their coming right out so I go sit down but get right back up and ask for the Manager. I could see that the pancakes she grabbed were not actually ours since she was not on her way to our table.   In the end a young Hispanic guy around 20 yrs old came to our table and asked what happened and I explained and he said that we didn't have to pay for anything and asked did we want anything else from the menu.   I won't lie...The pancakes were still very good. My daughter and I even took an order each of pancakes home.   I never did get that business card Jazmin promised.   2 stars for the free food, the apology and the pancakes to go.  Side note: Everyone waiting tables and the hostess were all very young women. There were no authoritative figures anywhere in the restaurant. Management was not there.  WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY, THE MOUSE WILL PLAY!!! THAT'S ALL I HAVE TO SAY!"							
39N6W9XWRD3S2ZUPKQ27FV6LB5BGYJ	"Why would a local go to a TGI Friday's inside the Orleans... good question.. that was definitely a lapse of judement! Fiance and I were looking for somewhere generic to eat lunch that was inbetween our offices.. I expected reliable, pretty good food  I ordered the turkey burger with cheese. Burger came out without cheese and then the guy proceeded to bring me a cold slice of cheese on a plate when I noticed it had no cheese. The burger was so cold the cheese wouldn't melt.. eww. seriously, throw it on the grill for a minute, how lazy are you? Oh and the bun was stale.. and kept breaking off as I ate it.. and the burger sucked. Nothing good about it. Service was obviously bad too."							
3D42WVSDH8BMOZYU96WPXA69AQAFYI	Will never come here ever again! Horrible service!							
35YHTYFL1GJ5K53P4V95QB2FS98FV9	Wonderful food and service. We went there for our wedding rehearsal dinner a few months ago. Everyone had a great experience!							
3YCT0L9OMMP1G5Z28ONDNTRHVW0NSJ	"Wonderful service.... I have been there before and have had a tasty Rock shrimp lemon butter garlic pasta that was to die for. However this recent visit, I think I got an off night or just ordered the wrong things. It was all good with the exception of the items being a little dry.  Maybe more sauce was needed by chance.  Next time I'm going to speak up.  Because I like it alot and will be back."							
3UUSLRKAULJ6BVOXVRBZWXJRUELD74	Worst customer service I have ever experienced at an Arby's. Maybe they were having a bad day?     Food was still good. Mountain Dew sucked though.							
3X52SWXE0XLBWIJK33O0470Q25IWCP	WOW is all I can say!! Great food definitely didtinctive in their own way and yes the stuffed mushrooms are as good as everyone says they are. Thanks yelpers you did good on this one!							
38O9DZ0A62304LCCFSMQU0SR2CD62Q	"Wow, I didn't know this place existed until today but my officemate and I had a hankering for pizza so we did a search for places that deliver and found AJ's. It wasn't the fastest I've ever had (we called when they opened, at 11 AM) so it could be that they have high volume at the start of their day because it took about 45 minutes to deliver at Epic, but it was delicious and totally worth the wait.   We got a deep dish special with one side the Deluxe and the other half the Spicy Chicken, both excellent. I liked that their Italian sausage is good quality with a lot of flavor and they don't scrimp on the toppings. Also, the crust was chewy on the inside and crisp on the outside - just right.  Definitely would recommend to anyone in the Verona area wanting some real pizza for delivery (not Dominos or Papa Johns)."							
3P520RYKCHMD5TL0TTMR8D9JP8MU5H	"Wow, we got lucky.  No wait.  Quick service.  In and out in less than an hour.  As always excellent food."							
3EQVJH0T401AL9Q6UQXQSEQ7B35TH5	"Wow!  Thanks Yelpers for the great reviews of this wonderful restaurant!!  I had the enchiladas, one w/red and the other green, cilantro lime rice and refrained beans.  My husband had the Carnitas Estilo Michoacan and I had to stop him from licking the plate when he finished it!!   Everything has a BIG, rich flavor!  The chip were warm and fresh and we couldn't decide which of the salsas we like best.   Generally, we like to go to a different restaurant each night while on vacation, but we might have to return here.   Yummmm....!"							
35NNO802AVCCMRW63CTZJRLUMYYINM	"Wow!  Wow!  Wow! Great Food!  Great Service!  Great Ambiance! We were looking for a place to take our father for his 78th birthday dinner.  He loves Italian.  Though Maggiano's is a chain, this location beats all of the other locations we have visited.  The waiter (Nester) was terrific.  We decided to do the Classic Family Style.  There was almost too much food for all of us.  Each course and entree was delicious.  Calamari was perfect.  Steamed mussels were awesome.  Caesar Salad was bountiful and a good palate cleanser before the entrees.  Peppercorn Beef, Salmon, Chicken Piccata, and Linguine with red clam sauce were all perfect together.  But remember you have two desserts coming so make some room.  On this particular evening they had a gentlemen playing the violin.  He came over and serenaded our father with Happy Birthday.  Bottom line Father loved it all. Thanks Maggiano's!"							
3M93N4X8HK35XF8HTQVLUMA0MCVSJK	"WOW! Strangely I live fairly close to a Maggianos and yet it took a trip to Vegas for me to try it out. What the heck took me so long???!!! This place is so yummy!! Our large group decided to get family style dinner. Salads were great, pastas were amazing! We got a salmon dish that was so good. There was a roasted chicken which was slightly dry, but that was the worst of it.  Service was great and our waitress was right on top of everything!  We even got to take home the leftovers....mmmm"							
3FO95NVK5CGMV3RU1V4UWDWRWTPSRC	"Wow! This was our first time eating here & we loved it! Everything was great, the service but even better was the food. A must have is the Bacon Wrapped Dates & for sure the Paella Valenciana. The shrimp in the paella was perfectly cooked. Chef Oscar Sanchez even came around to greet the patrons. A job well done :-)"							
329E6HTMSWIWOITKLWUWNT219LX3K3	WOW! This was our first time eating here & we loved it. Everything was great from the service to the drinks and the food was.even better. A must have is the bacon wrapped dates & the Paella Valenciana. The shrimp in the Paella was cooked perfectly. Chef Oscar Sanchez even came out to greet the patrons.							
3FHTJGYT8NGYTL2OT36O24D9708GPP	"WOW. I am sitting here with a full belly, absolutely impressed with the meal I just had. Fresh, flavorful and not too heavy. If I hadn't eaten like a million of the french fries, it would probably pass as healthy.  The owner was really nice and my to-go order was up quickly. It's right next to British Open Pub, so I can see a few post-drink meals happening in my future!   Oh, the hummus was AMAZING. When I saw it I expected it to be a little gritty and bland, but it was anything but. It has a great flavor but not too lemony or garlicy. Can't put my finger on exactly what is so awesome about it, but it is. Actually, even now as I'm as uncomfortably full as I am, I'm thinking about having another bite of it..."							
3MG8450X2OQHY33JD8V56JE0G8MPUX	"Wow. I cant believe that I haven't written a review for this place.  It's almost always busy. Morning, afternoon,night, there's cars in the drive thru.  The staff is always kind. Most fast food places looks like everyone who works there hates their lives.   Sometimes the guys on the late shift dance around for you.... Real positive energy! My order has never been wrong, or incomplete here, either.  If the food isn't ""classy"" or ""healthy"" enough for you, don't eat here. I like shopping organic, and what not, but anything in little doses will not hurt you."							
3RZS0FBRWKQLC9MJRHA5CDSU98FCPA	"Yeesh. The server was friendly and the place was open at 10pm. But it looks tired and dirty. From overuse not neglect. You have families with babies who drop fries all over the floor, spilled drinks, you name it. As for the food...must you ask? It's all the same, Chili's, TGIF, Applebee's, they get all their stuff from the same supplier. If you're a tourist, it's edible."							
3E9VAUV7BWURS8HMYQAXJ9VIDAXYAO	"Yelp's 365 Review Challenge 2014 #156 - #365  It was my last night at the Orleans and I wanted to have some cheap before going back to the room. Walking around the casino, I saw TGIF, figured it's just like any other Fridays.  There was no wait so I just quickly walked in and sat in the bar area. Service was quick and I ordered a glass of beer and some chicken wings. Food was on par like with any other Friday's franchise and the wings were tasty with mild wings sauce.   Lucky for me I was able to charge it to my room so I cab earn some points for my stay."							
3R15W654VD9ZFPH447ITF18R8DFQLV	"Yes it's a chain, but the food is ALWAYS delicious. I love every shrimp dish they offer. The traditional Italian dishes are average, but my hubby loves them.  Service can be hit or miss. I just love the quality of food enough to forgive the occasional semi-bad waiter. (forgetful, have to ask multiple times for one thing) not a biggie."							
3WYZV0QBFJT7BDW4Z8ORV68FTMPBXR	"Yes, Maggiano's is a chain restaurant that can be found in most US states. Yes, it's just typical, hearty Italian dishes. Yes, it gets pretty packed here at this particular one. And yes, I had a pretty awesome experience here even though I would have preferred to dine at a Michelin starred or famous celebrity chef's restaurant here in LV.  I joined some of my old colleagues from my previous job here for dinner during the Interop convention. We had a driver take us from our hotel to this restaurant so there was obviously NO parking problem. :)  We had a table reserved for about 6 of us and we were seated promptly. The place was JAMPACKED for a weeknight. But everyone around us seemed to be enjoying their meals and their service. It can definitely get pretty damn loud here.  We ordered tons of different pasta, chicken, seafood and dessert dishes. Everything served family style of course. Everything that came out tasted wonderful. I honestly didn't wanna look like a mcfatty pig in front of some of the executives I was dining with so I kept my portions on my plate pretty small. But when dessert came out...I opted to eat my full slice of cheesecake all to myself AND of course nibble on some of the other dessert plates that were still sitting there in the middle of our table.  Our waiter/waitresses were all very friendly. And service was quite efficient.  Would I dine at this particular Maggiano's again? Hmmm, well I have about a million bookmarked spots to try out, so I probably won't be coming back here anytime soon just due to the fact that I already know it's standard Italian food. But I would definitely recommend this place to anyone who's not that adventurous with other types of food and just want to enjoy their night with a hearty dinner at a well-known chain restaurant."							
306W7JMRYYEHWCVWR0CZF7RM2DGB8J	"You know the Lens Crafters slogan, ""Ready in about an hour"".  I was waiting at the mercy of the glasses gods, not really in the mood to shop, so I decided to talk a stroll to the other end of the mall for a glass of wine.  I considered each of the different restaurant options, but with the main goal in mind, wine, I opted for Maggiano's.    The rest of the mall was sparse, but you would never guess it was a Tuesday night upon entering.  The joint was hopping.  I found a vacant seat at the bar and grabbed their wine list.  I usually start with a white, but my mood was askew due to the onset of cool weather and early sunset.  After a brief study, I requested a glass of Meiomi Pinot Noir.  Score!!  Now, what to do with my hands while I sit here, but of course, an appetizer!  All of my friends can attest that I've been on a calamari quest of late.  Not surprising, I opt for the calamari.  While I'm kicking back sipping my savory cherry berry juice, the fellow next to me, a tourist from Connecticut, strikes up a lively conversation.  I discover he works for the Travel Channel, has an exact opposite wine palate from me, and we were both at the same event last Saturday (the Lee's 9th annual Wine Experience).  Perfecto!  Little golden rings cooked to lightly crunchy perfection arrive.  Pair them with Maggiano's famous marinara that suggests nuances of garlic, onion, and basil and I'm one happy camper who forgot she was waiting on anything.  The Lens Crafters notification call comes and goes, but I'm not ready to leave just yet, so I order up another glass of wine.  This time I order up a Cline Ancient Vines Zin, which isn't bad at all."							
3HO4MYYR1249OXLEYCWW0JNJL3XU6X	"You're probably wondering, why would anyone go to Maggiano's during their Vegas trip?  Hey, I love Maggiano's and when you know there's a good place to eat (whether it's Vegas, Boston, Philly, etc) you stick to it! As always, they never disappoint me.  I ordered the same stuff as I always do- their mussels for appetizer and of course, I always order chicken and spinach manacotti, which is yummy.   I stayed at MGM but I walked all the way over to fashion mall, just to eat at Maggianos and no regrets, b/c it was totally worth it!!!!"							
3TKXBROM5TQG315LOE17QK4DDETIJI	"Yum Yum Yum pretty much sums up my Maggiano's experience. I went for a wedding reception which allowed me to sample many appetizers and entrees. I was not disappointed in any of them. The highlights were the breaded zucchini which was so crunchy and flavorful. There was a spinach salad that tasted like a party in my mouth, with bits of creamy cheese and pancetta bits. The entrees were equally gratifying, my faves were the salmon on a bed of spinach (cooked to absolute perfection) and the raviolis in a pesto cream sauce. The Chicken Parmesan was also a front runner, the chicken breasts were pounded so thin, yet still juicy and moist.   I will definitely venture back to this gem in the mall!!!"							
3UUSLRKAULJ6BVOXVRBZWXJRUEM7DZ	"YUM!  First of all, this place is really big, and the interior has a good blend of homey yet classy and kind of made me feel like a snobby foodie. :) The restaurant has window panes across two sides and allows for a nice view of Las Vegas blvd (but not like a straight down the strip kind of view). Our server was very gracious, and the bread was amazing!  I ordered Chicken Florentine with Angel hair which absolutely blew my mind. The chicken was stuffed with spinach, parmesan cheese, and sun dried tomatoes and coated with bread crumbs. The flavors and textures were all perfect!  The best part was that the lunch price was not too price at all! Most of the pasta items were in the low-teens and the portions were enormous!   I highly recommend this place to anyone who is visiting Vegas :)"							
33K3E8REWWBO9FYXWW4H44IELG48XP	"Yum! The food is great, the restaurant is clean and the team was friendly and quick! The menu provides various options and being close to work is a plus as well. I highly recommend the Picado Pita.. Your traditional gyro with a kick of jalapeo!"							
3D7VY91L65DWH1X0L1MIKPSHMI5MBI	Yummm! Our dinner was so much more than I ever expected. Everything was fresh and seasoned perfectly. The portions were huge! I couldn't believe how reasonably priced the menu was as well. We had a corner window table that overlooked the strip. It was perfect for the kids. Strolling musicians and the best chocolate cake topped off the evening! We are going back for a second time tonight and will be sure to visit Maggiano's back home as well.							
3PCPFX4U406DFX78IWFVKO37BHTFQF	"Yummy as always.  I had the Turkey Chive Crepe Eggs.  It was great.  I wish they still had the California Delight on the menu.  That was my favorite.  This is the location nearest my work and I was surprised to get 1) a parking spot and 2) a table with no wait.  It is right across from St. Joe's and it is always packed.  But apparently 12:40 is the time to go.  Darn, I gave away the secret."							
302OLP89DZNEP5GH2YS8MI3ZAMGACT	"Yummy. Parmesan in crusted Talapia, momma's lasagna, fettuccine Alfredo, Cesar salad. 4.5 to 5 stars from all four of us. Fettuccine Alfredo is a huge portion."							
